LETTER 9

On Philosophy and Friendship

A

You desire to know whether Epicurus is right when, in one of

his letters,[1] he rebukes those who hold that the wise man is self-
sufficient and for that reason does not stand in need of friend-
ships. This is the objection raised by Epicurus against Stilbo and

those who believe[2] that the Supreme Good is a soul which is
insensible to feeling.
We are bound to meet with a double meaning if we try to
express the Greek term “lack of feeling” summarily, in a single
word, rendering it by the Latin word impatientia. For it may be
understood in the meaning the opposite to that which we wish
it to have. What we mean to express is, a soul which rejects any
sensation of evil; but people will interpret the idea as that of a soul
which can endure no evil. Consider, therefore, whether it is not
better to say “a soul that cannot be harmed,” or “a soul entirely
beyond the realm of suffering.”
There is this difference between ourselves and the other
school:[3] our ideal wise man feels his troubles, but overcomes
them; their wise man does not even feel them. But we and
they alike hold this idea—that the wise man is self-sufficient.
Nevertheless, he desires friends, neighbours, and associates, no
matter how much he is sufficient unto himself.

44 THE TAO OF SENECA | VOLUME 1
And mark how self-sufficient he is; for on occasion he can be
content with a part of himself. If he lose a hand through disease
or war, or if some accident puts out one or both of his eyes, he
will be satisfied with what is left, taking as much pleasure in his
impaired and maimed body as he took when it was sound. But
while he does not pine for these parts if they are missing, he
prefers not to lose them.
In this sense the wise man is self-sufficient, that he can do
without friends, not that he desires to do without them. When
I say “can,” I mean this: he endures the loss of a friend with
equanimity.
But he need never lack friends, for it lies in his own control
how soon he shall make good a loss. Just as Phidias, if he lose a
statue, can straightway carve another, even so our master in the
art of making friendships can fill the place of a friend he has lost.
If you ask how one can make oneself a friend quickly, I will tell
you, provided we are agreed that I may pay my debt[4] at once and
square the account, so far as this letter is concerned. Hecato,[5]
says: “I can show you a philtre, compounded without drugs, herbs,
or any witch’s incantation: ‘If you would be loved, love.’” Now
there is great pleasure, not only in maintaining old and established
friendships, but also in beginning and acquiring new ones.
There is the same difference between winning a new friend
and having already won him, as there is between the farmer who
sows and the farmer who reaps. The philosopher Attalus used
to say: “It is more pleasant to make than to keep a friend, as
it is more pleasant to the artist to paint than to have finished
painting.” When one is busy and absorbed in one’s work, the very
absorption affords great delight; but when one has withdrawn
one’s hand from the completed masterpiece, the pleasure is not
so keen. Henceforth it is the fruits of his art that he enjoys; it was
the art itself that he enjoyed while he was painting. In the case
of our children, their young manhood yields the more abundant
fruits, but their infancy was sweeter.

Let us now return to the question. The wise man, I say, self-
sufficient though he be, nevertheless desires friends if only for the

purpose of practicing friendship, in order that his noble qualities
may not lie dormant. Not, however, for the purpose mentioned by

Epicurus[6] in the letter quoted above: “That there may be some-
one to sit by him when he is ill, to help him when he is in prison

or in want;” but that he may have someone by whose sick-bed
he himself may sit, someone a prisoner in hostile hands whom
he himself may set free. He who regards himself only, and enters
upon friendships for this reason, reckons wrongly. The end will
be like the beginning: he has made friends with one who might
assist him out of bondage; at the first rattle of the chain such a
friend will desert him.
These are the so-called “fair-weather” friendships; one who is
chosen for the sake of utility will be satisfactory only so long as
he is useful. Hence prosperous men are blockaded by troops of
friends; but those who have failed stand amid vast loneliness their
friends fleeing from the very crisis which is to test their worth.
Hence, also, we notice those many shameful cases of persons who,
through fear, desert or betray. The beginning and the end cannot
but harmonize. He who begins to be your friend because it pays
will also cease because it pays. A man will be attracted by some
reward offered in exchange for his friendship, if he be attracted
by aught in friendship other than friendship itself.
For what purpose, then, do I make a man my friend? In order
to have someone for whom I may die, whom I may follow into
exile, against whose death I may stake my own life, and pay the
pledge, too. The friendship which you portray is a bargain and not
a friendship; it regards convenience only, and looks to the results.

46 THE TAO OF SENECA | VOLUME 1
Beyond question the feeling of a lover has in it something akin
to friendship; one might call it friendship run mad. But, though
this is true, does anyone love for the sake of gain, or promotion,
or renown? Pure[7] love, careless of all other things, kindles the
soul with desire for the beautiful object, not without the hope of
a return of the affection. What then? Can a cause which is more
honourable produce a passion that is base?
You may retort: “We are now discussing the question whether
friendship is to be cultivated for its own sake.” On the contrary,
nothing more urgently requires demonstration; for if friendship is
to be sought for its own sake, he may seek it who is self-sufficient.
“How, then,” you ask, “does he seek it?” Precisely as he seeks an
object of great beauty, not attracted to it by desire for gain, nor yet
frightened by the instability of Fortune. One who seeks friendship
for favourable occasions, strips it of all its nobility.
“The wise man is self-sufficient.” This phrase, my dear Lucilius,
is incorrectly explained by many; for they withdraw the wise man
from the world, and force him to dwell within his own skin. But
we must mark with care what this sentence signifies and how
far it applies; the wise man is sufficient unto himself for a happy
existence, but not for mere existence. For he needs many helps
towards mere existence; but for a happy existence he needs only
a sound and upright soul, one that despises Fortune.
I should like also to state to you one of the distinctions of
Chrysippus,[8] who declares that the wise man is in want of
nothing, and yet needs many things.[9] “On the other hand,” he
says, “nothing is needed by the fool, for he does not understand
how to use anything, but he is in want of everything.” The wise
man needs hands, eyes, and many things that are necessary for
his daily use; but he is in want of nothing. For want implies a
necessity, and nothing is necessary to the wise man.
Therefore, although he is self-sufficient, yet he has need of
friends. He craves as many friends as possible, not, however, that
he may live happily; for he will live happily even without friends.
The Supreme Good calls for no practical aids from outside; it is
developed at home, and arises entirely within itself. If the good
seeks any portion of itself from without, it begins to be subject
to the play of Fortune.
People may say: “But what sort of existence will the wise man
have, if he be left friendless when thrown into prison, or when
stranded in some foreign nation, or when delayed on a long
voyage, or when out upon a lonely shore?” His life will be like
that of Jupiter, who, amid the dissolution of the world, when the
gods are confounded together and Nature rests for a space from
her work, can retire into himself and give himself over to his own
thoughts.[10] In some such way as this the sage will act; he will
retreat into himself, and live with himself.
As long as he is allowed to order his affairs according to his

judgment, he is self-sufficient—and marries a wife; he is self-
sufficient—and brings up children; he is self-sufficient—and

yet could not live if he had to live without the society of man.
Natural promptings, and not his own selfish needs, draw him
into Friendships. For just as other things have for us an inherent
attractiveness, so has friendship. As we hate solitude and crave
society, as nature draws men to each other, so in this matter also
there is an attraction which makes us desirous of friendship.
Nevertheless, though the sage may love his friends dearly, often
comparing them with himself, and putting them ahead of himself,
yet all the good will be limited to his own being, and he will
speak the words which were spoken by the very Stilbo[11] whom
Epicurus criticizes in his letter. For Stilbo, after his country was
captured and his children and his wife lost, as he emerged from
the general desolation alone and yet happy, spoke as follows to

48 THE TAO OF SENECA | VOLUME 1
Demetrius, called Sacker of Cities because of the destruction he
brought upon them, in answer to the question whether he had
lost anything: “I have all my goods with me!”
There is a brave and stout-hearted man for you! The enemy
conquered, but Stilbo conquered his conqueror. “I have lost
nothing!” Aye, he forced Demetrius to wonder whether he himself
had conquered after all. “My goods are all with me!” In other
words, he deemed nothing that might be taken from him to be
a good.
We marvel at certain animals because they can pass through
fire and suffer no bodily harm; but how much more marvellous
is a man who has marched forth unhurt and unscathed through
fire and sword and devastation! Do you understand now how
much easier it is to conquer a whole tribe than to conquer one
man? This saying of Stilbo makes common ground with Stoicism;
the Stoic also can carry his goods unimpaired through cities that
have been burned to ashes; for he is self-sufficient. Such are the
bounds which he sets to his own happiness.
But you must not think that our school alone can utter noble
words; Epicurus himself, the reviler of Stilbo, spoke similar
language;[12] put it down to my credit, though I have already wiped
out my debt for the present day.[13] He says: “Whoever does not
regard what he has as most ample wealth, is unhappy, though he
be master of the whole world.” Or, if the following seems to you
a more suitable phrase—for we must try to render the meaning
and not the mere words: “A man may rule the world and still be
unhappy, if he does not feel that he is supremely happy.”
In order, however, that you may know that these sentiments
are universal,[14] suggested, of course, by Nature, you will find in
one of the comic poets this verse;
Unblest is he who thinks himself unblest.[15]
or what does your condition matter, if it is bad in your own eyes?
You may say; “What then? If yonder man, rich by base means,
and yonder man, lord of many but slave of more, shall call
themselves happy, will their own opinion make them happy?” It
matters not what one says, but what one feels; also, not how one
feels on one particular day, but how one feels at all times. There is
no reason, however, why you should fear that this great privilege
will fall into unworthy hands; only the wise man is pleased with
his own. Folly is ever troubled with weariness of itself. Farewell.
Footnotes
1. Frag. 174 Usener.
2. i.e., the Cynics.
3. i.e., the Cynics.
4. i.e., the diurna mercedula; see Ep. vi, 7.
5. Frag. 27 Fowler.
6. Frag. 175 Usener.
7. “Pure love,” i.e., love in its essence, unalloyed with other emotions.
8. Cf. his Frag. moral. 674 von Arnim.
9. The distinction is based upon the meaning of egere, “to be in want of ”
something indispensible, and opus esse, “to have need of ” something
which one can do without.
10. This refers to the Stoic conflagration: after certain cycles their world was
destroyed by fire. Cf. E. V. Arnold, Roman Stoicism, pp. 192 f.; cf. also
Chrysippus, Frag. phys. 1065 von Arnim.
11. Gnomologici Vaticani 515a
Sternberg.

12. Frag. 474 Usener.
13. Cf. above § 6.
14. i.e., not confined to the Stoics, etc.
15. Author unknown; perhaps, as Buecheler thinks, adapted from the Greek.

LETTER 10
On Living to Oneself

A

Yes, I do not change my opinion: avoid the many, avoid the few,
avoid even the individual. I know of no one with whom I should
be willing to have you shared. And see what an opinion of you I
have; for I dare to trust you with your own self. Crates, they say,

the disciple of the very Stilbo whom I mentioned in a former let-
ter, noticed a young man walking by himself, and asked him what

he was doing all alone. “I am communing with myself,” replied the
youth. “Pray be careful, then,” said Crates, “and take good heed;
you are communing with a bad man!”
When persons are in mourning, or fearful about something, we
are accustomed to watch them that we may prevent them from
making a wrong use of their loneliness. No thoughtless person
ought to be left alone; in such cases he only plans folly, and heaps
up future dangers for himself or for others; he brings into play his
base desires; the mind displays what fear or shame used to repress;
it whets his boldness, stirs his passions, and goads his anger. And
finally, the only benefit that solitude confers—the habit of trusting
no man, and of fearing no witnesses—is lost to the fool; for he
betrays himself.
Mark therefore what my hopes are for you—nay, rather, what I
am promising myself, inasmuch as hope is merely the title of an
uncertain blessing: I do not know any person with whom I should
prefer you to associate rather than yourself.
I remember in what a great-souled way you hurled forth
certain phrases, and how full of strength they were! I immediately
congratulated myself and said: “These words did not come from
the edge of the lips; these utterances have a solid foundation. This
man is not one of the many; he has regard for his real welfare.”
Speak, and live, in this way; see to it that nothing keeps you
down. As for your former prayers, you may dispense the gods
from answering them; offer new prayers; pray for a sound mind
and for good health, first of soul and then of body. And of course
you should offer those prayers frequently. Call boldly upon God;
you will not be asking him for that which belongs to another.
But I must, as is my custom, send a little gift along with this
letter. It is a true saying which I have found in Athenodorus:[1]
“Know that thou art freed from all desires when thou hast reached
such a point that thou prayest to God for nothing except what
thou canst pray for openly.” But how foolish men are now! They
whisper the basest of prayers to heaven; but if anyone listens,
they are silent at once. That which they are unwilling for men to
know, they communicate to God. Do you not think, then, that
some such wholesome advice as this could be given you: “Live
among men as if God beheld you; speak with God as if men were
listening”? Farewell.
Footnotes
1. Frag. de superstitione 36 H., according to Rossbach.

LETTER 11
On the Blush of Modesty

A

Your friend and I have had a conversation. He is a man of abil-
ity; his very first words showed what spirit and understanding he

possesses, and what progress he has already made. He gave me a
foretaste, and he will not fail to answer thereto. For he spoke not
from forethought, but was suddenly caught off his guard. When
he tried to collect himself, he could scarcely banish that hue of
modesty, which is a good sign in a young man; the blush that
spread over his face seemed so to rise from the depths. And I
feel sure that his habit of blushing will stay with him after he has
strengthened his character, stripped off all his faults, and become
wise. For by no wisdom can natural weaknesses of the body be
removed. That which is implanted and inborn can be toned down
by training, but not overcome.
The steadiest speaker, when before the public, often breaks
into a perspiration, as if he had wearied or over-heated himself;
some tremble in the knees when they rise to speak; I know of
some whose teeth chatter, whose tongues falter, whose lips quiver.
Training and experience can never shake off this habit; nature
exerts her own power and through such a weakness makes her
presence known even to the strongest.
I know that the blush, too, is a habit of this sort, spreading
suddenly over the faces of the most dignified men. It is, indeed
more prevalent in youth, because of the warmer blood and the
sensitive countenance; nevertheless, both seasoned men and
aged men are affected by it. Some are most dangerous when they
redden, as if they were letting all their sense of shame escape.
Sulla, when the blood mantled his cheeks, was in his fiercest
mood. Pompey had the most sensitive cast of countenance; he
always blushed in the presence of a gathering, and especially at a
public assembly. Fabianus also, I remember, reddened when he
appeared as a witness before the senate; and his embarrassment
became him to a remarkable degree.
Such a habit is not due to mental weakness, but to the novelty of
a situation; an inexperienced person is not necessarily confused,
but is usually affected, because he slips into this habit by natural
tendency of the body. Just as certain men are full-blooded, so
others are of a quick and mobile blood, that rushes to the face
at once.
As I remarked, Wisdom can never remove this habit; for if she
could rub out all our faults, she would be mistress of the universe.
Whatever is assigned to us by the terms of our birth and the blend
in our constitutions, will stick with us, no matter how hard or
how long the soul may have tried to master itself. And we cannot
forbid these feelings any more than we can summon them.
Actors in the theatre, who imitate the emotions, who portray
fear and nervousness, who depict sorrow, imitate bashfulness by
hanging their heads, lowering their voices, and keeping their eyes
fixed and rooted upon the ground. They cannot, however, muster
a blush; for the blush cannot be prevented or acquired. Wisdom
will not assure us of a remedy, or give us help against it; it comes
or goes unbidden, and is a law unto itself.
But my letter calls for its closing sentence. Hear and take to
heart this useful and wholesome motto:[1] “Cherish some man
of high character, and keep him ever before your eyes, living as

54 THE TAO OF SENECA | VOLUME 1
if he were watching you, and ordering all your actions as if he
beheld them.”
Such, my dear Lucilius, is the counsel of Epicurus;[2] he has
quite properly given us a guardian and an attendant. We can get
rid of most sins, if we have a witness who stands near us when we
are likely to go wrong. The soul should have someone whom it
can respect—one by whose authority it may make even its inner
shrine more hallowed.[3] Happy is the man who can make others
better, not merely when he is in their company, but even when he
is in their thoughts! And happy also is he who can so revere a man
as to calm and regulate himself by calling him to mind! One who
can so revere another, will soon be himself worthy of reverence.
Choose therefore a Cato; or, if Cato seems too severe a model,
choose some Laelius, a gentler spirit. Choose a master whose life,
conversation, and soul-expressing face have satisfied you; picture
him always to yourself as your protector or your pattern. For we
must indeed have someone according to whom we may regulate
our characters; you can never straighten that which is crooked
unless you use a ruler. Farewell.
Footnotes
1. Epicurus, Frag. 210 Usener.
2. Frag. 210 Usener.
3. The figure is taken from the ἄδυτον, the Holy of Holies in a temple. Cf.
Vergil, Aeneid, vi. 10 secreta Sibyllas.

THOUGHTS FROM MODERN STOICS

How To Be A Stoic:

An Interview With Author Elif Batuman

There’s been quite a surge of stories on Stoicism lately—appear-
ing everywhere from influential blogs to prestigious outlets

like Sports Illustrated, New York Times, The Guardian and The
Atlantic. One of the pieces that caught our attention was “How
to Be a Stoic” in The New Yorker. It’s by Elif Batuman (Twitter:
@BananaKarenina), a staff writer at The New Yorker and author
of the acclaimed The Idiot and The Possessed: Adventures with
Russian Books and the People Who Read Them. Her stories have
appeared in Best American Travel Writing and Best American
Essays anthologies.
Her piece is a wonderful exploration of Epictetus and so the
Daily Stoic team reached out to learn more about Elif and her
relation to Stoicism. How does she use it on a day-to-day basis?
What are the common misconceptions about the philosophy?

How did she first discover it? What are some characters in litera-
ture that embody Stoicism? Was there anything off-putting about

a philosophy that appears to have a ‘male-bent’?
We are grateful to Elif for agreeing to do this interview and her
generous answers which you can read below. Enjoy!
History tends to show that Stoicism is often popular during
times of difficulty or uncertainty. Was that true in your case? I
was curious if you could give our readers a bit of a background

56 THE TAO OF SENECA | VOLUME 1
regarding your story of discovering Epictetus and how it has
helped you?
Yes, I had just started a new job in a new country (Turkey),
where there was a certain amount of political tension. I was also
in the middle of a problematic long-distance relationship, and
living in a remote area. I had gotten really behind on work in the
previous months (my first book, The Possessed, had just come out,
so I was doing travel and publicity for that, and then also I had had
some personal issues), and had deliberately sought out this kind
of isolated living situation so I could catch up, but then I ended
up feeling really lost and alone. I was also doing some reporting,
I was working on a story for the New Yorker about soccer fan
groups in Istanbul, which involved hanging out with a milieu I
wasn’t really used to, often late at night—it was a stressful time.
You mentioned that you first discovered Epictetus back in 2011
and you wrote about him more than five years later. Did you
read any of the other Stoics in between? I can only assume he
made a strong impression on you and was wondering how often
did his ideas come to mind over the years in your daily life?
Was it something that was a constant presence or it was more
in specific situations?
That piece I wrote was just about Epictetus, and I only had 750
words, so it’s a bit schematic. My actual route to the Stoics was
more circuitous. I’m sure I had been introduced to Stoic ideas in
the past, but the first time they really registered with me was in
Istanbul in 2010 or 2011 when I read Sarah Bakewell’s wonderful
How to Live: Or A Life of Montaigne in One Question and Twenty
Attempts at an Answer. It’s kind of a self-help book in the form of
biographical essays about Montaigne. For me, all the most helpful
advice came from the Stoics. (Montaigne as you probably know
was really influenced by Stoicism, especially Seneca, though also

THOUGHTS FROM MODERN STOICS | ELIF BATUMAN 57
Epictetus, and also the Epicureans.) I wanted to know more about
the Stoics, so I bought A Guide to the Good Life: The Art of Stoic
Joy, by William B. Irvine, which was a terrific introduction to the
basic ideas and how they could be applied to daily life. After that

I read Seneca’s Dialogues and Essays, Marcus Aurelius’s Medita-
tions, and Epictetus’s Enchiridion.

I liked Marcus Aurelius and Seneca, too, but Epictetus was
definitely my favorite—I think he’s the funniest. With Marcus
Aurelius you have this world-weary emperor who is kind of a
mystic; Seneca writes in this flowery Latin, he’s a famous tragedian
and a speechwriter for Nero, so he has that whole thing going;
but Epictetus is born a slave, and then he becomes a teacher, and
all he cares about is teaching. I was teaching undergraduates at
the time, and I felt like Epictetus had been working on this same
eternal puzzle that I was, of how to get young people to do what’s
difficult, to make them think that things are worthwhile, to rally
their spirits, and it felt like finding this great friend and ally.
After I read the Enchiridion, I got the Discourses and Selected
Writings, the Penguin Classics one edited by Robert Dobbin,
which was marvelous, even better than the Enchiridion I had
downloaded for free online somewhere. Next I tried reading
Musonius Rufus, Epictetus’s teacher—he was great, too, but I
thought the ideas were more forcefully expressed in Epictetus.
Then I read Tad Brennan’s The Stoic Life, where he summarizes a
lot of Chrysippus’s ideas, but you know, Chrysippus really isn’t for
me, the whole thing about how everyone who isn’t 100% wise is
100% “vicious” seems kind of theoretical and alienating to me. I

prefer what I take to be Epictetus’s view, viz. that we’re all strug-
gling constantly, none of us will be perfect, but we can always get

better, and that improvement is not just not worthless, it’s actually
the most meaningful thing there is.

58 THE TAO OF SENECA | VOLUME 1
At least online (and of course, historically) Stoicism seems
to have a predominant number of males. Many of them hear
about it from action movies like Gladiator or the military or
now, with its popularity in sports, it might get passed to them
in the locker room. I’m curious about two things. One, as a
woman, was there anything off putting about that male-bent?
Two, since the actual philosophy itself is universal and can
help anyone, what can be done to recreate your experience and
exposure to philosophy?

Well, I never saw Gladiator and have never served in the mili-
tary or spent much time in a men’s locker room, so I can’t really

speak to the “male bent” that Stoicism might have in those venues.
As a reader in the privacy of my home, I didn’t find there was

anything off-puttingly male about Stoic philosophy. I guess Epi-
ctetus talks about beards in a way I can’t really identify with, but

I don’t think that’s a major cornerstone of his belief. And Muso-
nius Rufus wrote in a really moving way about how he thought

women and men should have the same education in philosophy,
that women are just as capable as men of applying and benefiting
from philosophical ideas. And Seneca does write those letters to
women, including his mother, so clearly he thinks Stoicism can
help women.
I think there’s a common misconception about Stoicism, that
it’s about forcing yourself to somehow not feel emotions; that’s
probably an idea that would appeal more to men than to women
(since, from childhood, boys are encouraged to be macho, while
girls are encouraged to be in touch with their emotions). But the
thing I love about Epictetus is that it’s really all about handling
emotions. He’s like, “You’re definitely going to feel this incredibly
powerful thing, but guess what, it’s not a law that dictates what

you think or how you act—you’re perfectly free, and in fact duty-
bound, to consult your reason and say, ‘OK, feeling, duly noted,

THOUGHTS FROM MODERN STOICS | ELIF BATUMAN 59
but you are just a feeling and not the truth.’” I think that’s maybe
an especially useful message for women, because of how little
girls are educated, or at least how they were when I was little. I
think for a lot of women (as well as men), there’s a tendency to
think: “Oh my God, I already felt this, so the bad thing already
happened.” And Epictetus is all about realizing, “Bro, nothing bad
has happened yet, everyone has feelings, now just take a moment
and evaluate what the truth is.”
In your New Yorker piece, you mention Epictetus’s line about

ignoring small slights—“For such a small price, I buy tranquil-
ity,” and how useful it has been. Are there other exercises or

quotes that you’d point to as practical and helpful?
Oh man, I use so many of them every day. Definitely, the one
about the bathhouse: “If you are heading out to bathe, picture to
yourself the typical scene at the bathhouse—people splashing,
pushing, yelling and pinching your clothes. You will complete the
act with more composure if you say at the outset, ‘I want a bath,
but at the same time I want to keep my will aligned with nature.’”
I actually thought that at a hamam in Istanbul once and it really
helped! I use it all the time on the subway and also at the airport.

Another great trick is when he’s like, “You know how if some-
one else tells you that something bad happened to them, you’re

like, ‘Oh, too bad, that’s life,’ but if something bad happens to
you, you’re like, ‘I am the unhappiest of mortals?’” Oh I found
the quote: “When somebody’s wife or child dies, to a man we all
routinely say, ‘Well, that’s part of life.’ But if one of our own family

is involved, then right away it’s ‘Poor, poor me!’ We would do bet-
ter to remember how we react when a similar loss afflicts others.”

I haven’t had to use that one with a big loss, but for little things
it really works. Last week I was having bureaucratic trouble with
my health insurance. I imagined I was listening to a friend tell

60 THE TAO OF SENECA | VOLUME 1
me about making such calls, and thought about how I would be
like, “Oh, too bad, insurance can be a pain”—I definitely wouldn’t
have been like, “Oh my God, you unfortunate person, your whole
week must have been ruined, what did you do wrong that this
happened to you, how could you have avoided it?”—which is kind
of how I felt about it myself, when I didn’t stop to think about it.
You are both a fantastic writer and a scholar—writing for the
New Yorker, n+1, Harper’s Magazine among others and you

hold a doctoral degree from Stanford in comparative litera-
ture. I’d love to know if there are any fictional characters that

you think embody Stoicism that you can point us to? Or any
other works of fiction that you think readers would love? (Also
I want to ask if you’ve read Memoirs of Hadrian by Marguerite
Yourcenar?)

I actually find Stoicism to be very present in the works of Char-
lotte Bronte’s novels Jane Eyre and Villette. (She calls it “stoicism”

or “Christian stoicism” or “Christian composure.”) Both those
novels are about a young woman who really has no social value
in the Victorian social marketplace—poor, orphaned, no social
connections, not beautiful—Bronte is really cold and brutal about
this. Those girls don’t have a single thing you need to make a good
marriage, which at that time is the only thing standing between
an unconnected young woman and a whole humiliating, possibly
long, life as a drudge and a dependent. There are these amazing
passages in both books, towards the end, where the character
realizes (or thinks she realizes) that love isn’t going to work out
for her, that the guy who she thought liked her is going to maybe
choose someone a little younger, richer, or more beautiful—so
she resigns herself to being a teacher, to doing her duty, to a life
without romance—and you really feel both the difficulty and the
freedom of that resignation. It’s really brutal and moving.

THOUGHTS FROM MODERN STOICS | ELIF BATUMAN 61
Dostoevsky has some pretty stoical characters, too, like Father

Zossima in The Brothers Karamazov. Of course he’s also a Chri-
stian. In general if you’re talking about the 19th-century Euro-
pean novel (my grad school beat...), Stoicism is going to be in

there through some version of Christianity. But I mean the affinity

between Stoicism and Christian thought is one of the ways Stoi-
cism has survived since antiquity.

Epictetus does also make a cameo in J.D. Salinger’s Franny
and Zooey.
I know you have a new book out, this time “a novel about not
just discovering but inventing oneself.” Can you tell us a bit
more about it? I also wanted to say that the cover is absolutely
beautiful.
Thank you! I love the cover. It’s a semi-autobiographical novel
called The Idiot. The main character, Selin, is 18, the book takes
place in her first year of college, and she’s a perfect example of
someone who doesn’t know about Stoicism, who takes emotions
for truth and finds signs everywhere, in all her almost physical,
visceral, emotional reactions—and then every now and then she
stops and is like “Are you fucking kidding me? This is life?” I’m
hoping to write more books about Selin in the future, and, if I
live long enough, I would love to do one where she discovers
Epictetus.

LETTER 12
On Old Age
A

Wherever I turn, I see evidences of my advancing years. I visited
lately my country-place, and protested against the money which
was spent on the tumble-down building. My bailiff maintained
that the flaws were not due to his own carelessness; “he was doing
everything possible, but the house was old.” And this was the
house which grew under my own hands! What has the future
in store for me, if stones of my own age are already crumbling?
I was angry, and I embraced the first opportunity to vent my
spleen in the bailiff ’s presence. “It is clear,” I cried, “that these
plane-trees are neglected; they have no leaves. Their branches are
so gnarled and shrivelled; the boles are so rough and unkempt!
This would not happen, if someone loosened the earth at their
feet, and watered them.” The bailiff swore by my protecting deity
that “he was doing everything possible, and never relaxed his
efforts, but those trees were old.” Between you and me, I had
planted those trees myself, I had seen them in their first leaf.

Then I turned to the door and asked: “Who is that broken-
down dotard? You have done well to place him at the entrance;

for he is outward bound.[1] Where did you get him? What pleasure
did it give you to take up for burial some other man’s dead?”[2] But
the slave said: “Don’t you know me, sir? I am Felicio; you used to
bring me little images.[3] My father was Philositus the steward, and
I am your pet slave.” “The man is clean crazy,” I remarked. “Has
my pet slave become a little boy again? But it is quite possible; his
teeth are just dropping out.”[4]
I owe it to my country-place that my old age became apparent
whithersoever I turned. Let us cherish and love old age; for it
is full of pleasure if one knows how to use it. Fruits are most
welcome when almost over; youth is most charming at its close;
the last drink delights the toper, the glass which souses him and
puts the finishing touch on his drunkenness.
Each pleasure reserves to the end the greatest delights which
it contains. Life is most delightful when it is on the downward
slope, but has not yet reached the abrupt decline. And I myself
believe that the period which stands, so to speak, on the edge of
the roof, possesses pleasures of its own. Or else the very fact of
our not wanting pleasures has taken the place of the pleasures
themselves. How comforting it is to have tired out one’s appetites,
and to have done with them!
“But,” you say, “it is a nuisance to be looking death in the
face!” Death, however, should be looked in the face by young
and old alike. We are not summoned according to our rating on
the censor’s list.[5] Moreover, no one is so old that it would be
improper for him to hope for another day of existence. And one
day, mind you, is a stage on life’s journey.
Our span of life is divided into parts; it consists of large circles
enclosing smaller. One circle embraces and bounds the rest; it
reaches from birth to the last day of existence. The next circle
limits the period of our young manhood. The third confines all
of childhood in its circumference. Again, there is, in a class by
itself, the year; it contains within itself all the divisions of time
by the multiplication of which we get the total of life. The month
is bounded by a narrower ring. The smallest circle of all is the

64 THE TAO OF SENECA | VOLUME 1
day; but even a day has its beginning and its ending, its sunrise
and its sunset.
Hence Heraclitus, whose obscure style gave him his surname,[6]
remarked: “One day is equal to every day.” Different persons have
interpreted the saying in different ways. Some hold that days are
equal in number of hours, and this is true; for if by “day” we
mean twenty-four hours’ time, all days must be equal, inasmuch
as the night acquires what the day loses. But others maintain that
one day is equal to all days through resemblance, because the
very longest space of time possesses no element which cannot
be found in a single day—namely, light and darkness—and even
to eternity day makes these alternations[7] more numerous, not
different when it is shorter and different again when it is longer.
Hence, every day ought to be regulated as if it closed the series,
as if it rounded out and completed our existence.
Pacuvius, who by long occupancy made Syria his own,[8] used
to hold a regular burial sacrifice in his own honour, with wine and
the usual funeral feasting, and then would have himself carried
from the dining room to his chamber, while eunuchs applauded
and sang in Greek to a musical accompaniment: “He has lived his
life, he has lived his life!”
Thus Pacuvius had himself carried out to burial every day. Let
us, however, do from a good motive what he used to do from a
debased motive; let us go to our sleep with joy and gladness; let
us say:
I have lived; the course which Fortune set for me
Is finished.[9]
And if God is pleased to add another day, we should welcome
it with glad hearts. That man is happiest, and is secure in his
own possession of himself, who can await the morrow without

apprehension. When a man has said: “I have lived!”, every morn-
ing he arises he receives a bonus.

But now I ought to close my letter. “What?” you say; “shall it
come to me without any little offering? “Be not afraid; it brings
something—nay, more than something, a great deal. For what
is more noble than the following saying[10] of which I make this
letter the bearer: “It is wrong to live under constraint; but no
man is constrained to live under constraint.” Of course not. On
all sides lie many short and simple paths to freedom; and let us
thank God that no man can be kept in life. We may spurn the
very constraints that hold us
“Epicurus,” you reply, “uttered these words; what are you
doing with another’s property?” Any truth, I maintain, is my
own property. And I shall continue to heap quotations from
Epicurus upon you, so that all persons who swear by the words
of another, and put a value upon the speaker and not upon the
thing spoken, may understand that the best ideas are common
property. Farewell.
Footnotes
1. A jesting allusion to the Roman funeral; the corpse’s feet pointing towards
the door.
2. His former owner should have kept him and buried him.
3. Small figures, generally of terra-cotta, were frequently given to children as
presents at the Saturnalia. Cf. Macrobius, i. 11. 49 sigila . . . pro se atque suis
piaculum.
4. i.e., the old slave resembles a child in that he is losing his teeth (but for the
second time).
5. i.e., seniores, as contrasted with iuniores.
6. ὁ σκοτεινός, “the Obscure,” Frag. 106 Diels2.
7. i.e., of light and darkness.
8. Usus was the mere enjoyment of a piece of property; dominium was the
exclusive right to its control. Possession for one, or two, years conferred
ownership. See Leage, Roman Private Law, pp. 133, 152, and 164.
Although Pacuvius was governor so long that the province seemed to
belong to him, yet he knew he might die any day.
9. Vergil, Aeneid, iv. 653.
10. Epicurus, Sprüche, 9 Wokte.

LETTER 13
On Groundless Fears

A

[If interested, a free audiobook version of this letter
can be found at this web address: tim.blog/13]
I know that you have plenty of spirit; for even before you began
to equip yourself with maxims which were wholesome and potent
to overcome obstacles, you were taking pride in your contest with
Fortune; and this is all the more true, now that you have grappled
with Fortune and tested your powers. For our powers can never

inspire in us implicit faith in ourselves except when many dif-
ficulties have confronted us on this side and on that, and have

occasionally even come to close quarters with us. It is only in
this way that the true spirit can be tested—the spirit that will
never consent to come under the jurisdiction of things external
to ourselves.
This is the touchstone of such a spirit; no prizefighter can go
with high spirits into the strife if he has never been beaten black
and blue; the only contestant who can confidently enter the lists
is the man who has seen his own blood, who has felt his teeth
rattle beneath his opponent’s fist, who has been tripped and felt
the full force of his adversary’s charge, who has been downed in
body but not in spirit, one who, as often as he falls, rises again
with greater defiance than ever.
So then, to keep up my figure, Fortune has often in the past
got the upper hand of you, and yet you have not surrendered,
but have leaped up and stood your ground still more eagerly. For
manliness gains much strength by being challenged; nevertheless,
if you approve, allow me to offer some additional safeguards by
which you may fortify yourself.
There are more things, Lucilius, likely to frighten us than there
are to crush us; we suffer more often in imagination than in reality.
I am not speaking with you in the Stoic strain but in my milder
style. For it is our Stoic fashion to speak of all those things, which
provoke cries and groans, as unimportant and beneath notice;
but you and I must drop such great-sounding words, although,
heaven knows, they are true enough. What I advise you to do is,
not to be unhappy before the crisis comes; since it may be that
the dangers before which you paled as if they were threatening
you, will never come upon you; they certainly have not yet come.
Accordingly, some things torment us more than they ought;
some torment us before they ought; and some torment us
when they ought not to torment us at all. We are in the habit of
exaggerating, or imagining, or anticipating, sorrow.
The first of these three faults[1] may be postponed for the
present, because the subject is under discussion and the case is
still in court, so to speak. That which I should call trifling, you will
maintain to be most serious; for of course I know that some men
laugh while being flogged, and that others wince at a box on the
ear. We shall consider later whether these evils derive their power
from their own strength, or from our own weakness.
Do me the favour, when men surround you and try to talk you
into believing that you are unhappy, to consider not what you hear
but what you yourself feel, and to take counsel with your feelings
and question yourself independently, because you know your own
affairs better than anyone else does. Ask: “Is there any reason

68 THE TAO OF SENECA | VOLUME 1
why these persons should condole with me? Why should they be
worried or even fear some infection from me, as if troubles could
be transmitted? Is there any evil involved, or is it a matter merely
of ill report, rather than an evil?” Put the question voluntarily to
yourself: “Am I tormented without sufficient reason, am I morose,
and do I convert what is not an evil into what is an evil?”
You may retort with the question: “How am I to know whether
my sufferings are real or imaginary?” Here is the rule for such
matters: we are tormented either by things present, or by things
to come, or by both. As to things present, the decision is easy.
Suppose that your person enjoys freedom and health, and that
you do not suffer from any external injury. As to what may happen
to it in the future, we shall see later on. Today there is nothing
wrong with it.
“But,” you say, “something will happen to it.” First of all,
consider whether your proofs of future trouble are sure. For it is
more often the case that we are troubled by our apprehensions,
and that we are mocked by that mocker, rumour, which is wont
to settle wars, but much more often settles individuals. Yes, my
dear Lucilius; we agree too quickly with what people say. We do
not put to the test those things which cause our fear; we do not
examine into them; we blench and retreat just like soldiers who
are forced to abandon their camp because of a dust-cloud raised
by stampeding cattle, or are thrown into a panic by the spreading
of some unauthenticated rumour.
And somehow or other it is the idle report that disturbs us
most. For truth has its own definite boundaries, but that which
arises from uncertainty is delivered over to guesswork and the
irresponsible license of a frightened mind. That is why no fear is
so ruinous and so uncontrollable as panic fear. For other fears are
groundless, but this fear is witless.
Let us, then, look carefully into the matter. It is likely that some
troubles will befall us; but it is not a present fact. How often has
the unexpected happened! How often has the expected never
come to pass! And even though it is ordained to be, what does
it avail to run out to meet your suffering? You will suffer soon
enough, when it arrives; so look forward meanwhile to better
things.
What shall you gain by doing this? Time. There will be many
happenings meanwhile which will serve to postpone, or end, or
pass on to another person, the trials which are near or even in
your very presence. A fire has opened the way to flight. Men
have been let down softly by a catastrophe. Sometimes the sword
has been checked even at the victim’s throat. Men have survived
their own executioners. Even bad fortune is fickle. Perhaps it will
come, perhaps not; in the meantime it is not. So look forward to
better things.
The mind at times fashions for itself false shapes of evil when
there are no signs that point to any evil; it twists into the worst
construction some word of doubtful meaning; or it fancies some
personal grudge to be more serious than it really is, considering
not how angry the enemy is, but to what lengths he may go if
he is angry. But life is not worth living, and there is no limit
to our sorrows, if we indulge our fears to the greatest possible
extent; in this matter, let prudence help you, and contemn with a
resolute spirit even when it is in plain sight. If you cannot do this,
counter one weakness with another, and temper your fear with
hope. There is nothing so certain among these objects of fear that
it is not more certain still that things we dread sink into nothing
and that things we hope for mock us.
Accordingly, weigh carefully your hopes as well as your fears,
and whenever all the elements are in doubt, decide in your own
favour; believe what you prefer. And if fear wins a majority of the

70 THE TAO OF SENECA | VOLUME 1
votes, incline in the other direction anyhow, and cease to harass
your soul, reflecting continually that most mortals, even when
no troubles are actually at hand or are certainly to be expected in
the future, become excited and disquieted. No one calls a halt on
himself, when he begins to be urged ahead; nor does he regulate
his alarm according to the truth. No one says; “The author of the
story is a fool, and he who has believed it is a fool, as well as he
who fabricated it.” We let ourselves drift with every breeze; we
are frightened at uncertainties, just as if they were certain. We
observe no moderation. The slightest thing turns the scales and
throws us forthwith into a panic.
But I am ashamed either to admonish you sternly or to try to
beguile you with such mild remedies.[2] Let another say. “Perhaps
the worst will not happen.” You yourself must say. “Well, what if
it does happen? Let us see who wins! Perhaps it happens for my
best interests; it may be that such a death will shed credit upon
my life.” Socrates was ennobled by the hemlock draught. Wrench
from Cato’s hand his sword, the vindicator of liberty, and you
deprive him of the greatest share of his glory.
I am exhorting you far too long, since you need reminding
rather than exhortation. The path on which I am leading you is
not different from that on which your nature leads you; you were
born to such conduct as I describe. Hence there is all the more
reason why you should increase and beautify the good that is in
you.
But now, to close my letter, I have only to stamp the usual seal
upon it, in other words, to commit thereto some noble message
to be delivered to you: “The fool, with all his other faults, has this
also, he is always getting ready to live.”[3] Reflect, my esteemed
Lucilius, what this saying means, and you will see how revolting
is the fickleness of men who lay down every day new foundations
of life, and begin to build up fresh hopes even at the brink of the
grave.
Look within your own mind for individual instances; you will
think of old men who are preparing themselves at that very hour
for a political career, or for travel, or for business. And what is
baser than getting ready to live when you are already old? I should
not name the author of this motto, except that it is somewhat
unknown to fame and is not one of those popular sayings of
Epicurus which I have allowed myself to praise and to appropriate.
Farewell.
Footnotes
1. Seneca dismisses the topic of “exaggerated ills,” because judgements will
differ concerning present troubles; the Stoics, for example, would not admit
that torture was an evil at all. He then passes on to the topic of “imaginary
ills,” §§ 6-7, and afterwards to “anticipated ills,” §§ 8-11. From § 12 on, he
deals with both imaginary and anticipated ills.
2. Cf. Solon’s καί με κωτίλλοντα λείως τραχὺν ἐκφανεῖ νόον.
3. Epicurus, Frag. 494 Usener.

LETTER 14

On the Reasons for Withdrawing

From the World
A

I confess that we all have an inborn affection for our body; I con-
fess that we are entrusted with its guardianship. I do not maintain

that the body is not to be indulged at all; but I maintain that we
must not be slaves to it. He will have many masters who makes
his body his master, who is over-fearful in its behalf, who judges
everything according to the body.
We should conduct ourselves not as if we ought to live for the
body, but as if we could not live without it. Our too great love for
it makes us restless with fears, burdens us with cares, and exposes
us to insults. Virtue is held too cheap by the man who counts his
body too dear. We should cherish the body with the greatest care;
but we should also be prepared, when reason, self-respect, and
duty demand the sacrifice, to deliver it even to the flames.
Let us, however, in so far as we can, avoid discomforts as well
as dangers, and withdraw to safe ground, by thinking continually
how we may repel all objects of fear. If I am not mistaken, there
are three main classes of these: we fear want, we fear sickness, and
we fear the troubles which result from the violence of the stronger.
And of all these, that which shakes us most is the dread
which hangs over us from our neighbour’s ascendancy; for it is
accompanied by great outcry and uproar. But the natural evils
which I have mentioned—want and sickness, steal upon us silently
with no shock of terror to the eye or to the ear. The other kind of
evil comes, so to speak, in the form of a huge parade. Surrounding
it is a retinue of swords and fire and chains and a mob of beasts
to be let loose upon the disembowelled entrails of men.
Picture to yourself under this head the prison, the cross, the
rack, the hook, and the stake which they drive straight through
a man until it protrudes from his throat. Think of human limbs
torn apart by chariots driven in opposite directions, of the terrible
shirt smeared and interwoven with inflammable materials, and of
all the other contrivances devised by cruelty, in addition to those
which I have mentioned![1]
It is not surprising, then, if our greatest terror is of such a fate;
for it comes in many shapes and its paraphernalia are terrifying.
For just as the torturer accomplishes more in proportion to
the number of instruments which he displays—indeed, the
spectacle overcomes those who would have patiently withstood
the suffering—similarly, of all the agencies which coerce and
master our minds, the most effective are those which can make a
display. Those other troubles are of course not less serious; I mean
hunger, thirst, ulcers of the stomach, and fever that parches our
very bowels. They are, however, secret; they have no bluster and
no heralding; but these, like huge arrays of war, prevail by virtue
of their display and their equipment.
Let us, therefore, see to it that we abstain from giving offence.
It is sometimes the people that we ought to fear; or sometimes
a body of influential oligarchs in the Senate, if the method of
governing the State is such that most of the business is done by
that body; and sometimes individuals equipped with power by
the people and against the people. It is burdensome to keep the
friendship of all such persons; it is enough not to make enemies
of them. So the wise man will never provoke the anger of those

74 THE TAO OF SENECA | VOLUME 1
in power; nay, he will even turn his course, precisely as he would
turn from a storm if he were steering a ship.
When you travelled to Sicily, you crossed the Straits. The
reckless pilot scorned the blustering South Wind—the wind
which roughens the Sicilian Sea and forces it into choppy currents;
he sought not the shore on the left,[2] but the strand hard by the
place where Charybdis throws the seas into confusion. Your more
careful pilot, however, questions those who know the locality as
to the tides and the meaning of the clouds; he holds his course
far from that region notorious for its swirling waters. Our wise
man does the same he shuns a strong man who may be injurious
to him, making a point of not seeming to avoid him, because an
important part of one’s safety lies in not seeking safety openly;
for what one avoids, one condemns,
We should therefore look about us, and see how we may
protect ourselves from the mob. And first of all, we should have
no cravings like theirs; for rivalry results in strife. Again, let us
possess nothing that can be snatched from us to the great profit
of a plotting foe. Let there be as little booty as possible on your
person. No one sets out to shed the blood of his fellow-men for
the sake of bloodshed—at any rate very few. More murderers
speculate on their profits than give vent to hatred. If you are
empty-handed, the highwayman passes you by: even along an
infested road, the poor may travel in peace.[3]
Next, we must follow the old adage and avoid three things with
special care: hatred, jealousy, and scorn. And wisdom alone can
show you how this may be done. It is hard to observe a mean; we
must be chary of letting the fear of jealousy lead us into becoming
objects of scorn, lest, when we choose not to stamp others down,
we let them think that they can stamp us down. The power to
inspire fear has caused many men to be in fear.[4] Let us withdraw
ourselves in every way; for it is as harmful to be scorned as to be
admired.
One must therefore take refuge in philosophy; this pursuit,
not only in the eyes of good men, but also in the eyes of those
who are even moderately bad, is a sort of protecting emblem.[5]
For speechmaking at the bar, or any other pursuit that claims
the people’s attention, wins enemies for a man; but philosophy is
peaceful and minds her own business. Men cannot scorn her; she
is honoured by every profession, even the vilest among them. Evil
can never grow so strong, and nobility of character can never be
so plotted against, that the name of philosophy shall cease to be
worshipful and sacred.
Philosophy itself, however should be practiced with calmness
and moderation.
“Very well, then,” you retort, “do you regard the philosophy of
Marcus Cato as moderate? Cato’s voice strove to check a civil war.
Cato parted the swords of maddened chieftains. When some fell
foul of Pompey and others fell foul of Caesar, Cato defied both
parties at once!”
Nevertheless, one may well question whether, in those days,
a wise man ought to have taken any part in public affairs, and
ask: “What do you mean, Marcus Cato? It is not now a question
of freedom; long since has freedom gone to rack and ruin. The
question is, whether it is Caesar or Pompey who controls the State.
Why, Cato, should you take sides in that dispute? It is no business
of yours; a tyrant is being selected. What does it concern you who
conquers? The better man may win; but the winner is bound to
be the worse man.”[6] I have referred to Cato’s final rôle. But even
in previous years the wise man was not permitted to intervene in
such plundering of the state; for what could Cato do but raise his
voice and utter unavailing words? At one time he was “bustled”
by the mob and spat upon and forcibly removed from the forum

76 THE TAO OF SENECA | VOLUME 1
and marked for exile; at another, he was taken straight to prison
from the senate-chamber.
However, we shall consider later[7] whether the wise man ought
to give his attention to politics; meanwhile, I beg you to consider
those Stoics who, shut out from public life, have withdrawn into
privacy for the purpose of improving men’s existence and framing
laws for the human race without incurring the displeasure of
those in power. The wise man will not upset the customs of the
people, nor will he invite the attention of the populace by any
novel ways of living.
“What then? Can one who follows out this Plan be safe in any
case?” I cannot guarantee you this any more than I can guarantee
good health in the case of a man who observes moderation;
although, as a matter of fact, good health results from such
moderation. Sometimes a vessel perishes in harbour; but what
do you think happens on the open sea? And how much more
beset with danger that man would be, who even in his leisure is
not secure, if he were busily working at many things! Innocent
persons sometimes perish; who would deny that? But the guilty
perish more frequently. A soldier’s skill is not at fault if he receives
the death-blow through his armour.
And finally, the wise man regards the reason for all his actions,
but not the results. The beginning is in our own power; fortune
decides the issue, but I do not allow her to pass sentence upon
myself. You may say: “But she can inflict a measure of suffering
and of trouble.” The highwayman does not pass sentence when
he slays.
Now you are stretching forth your hand for the daily gift.
Golden indeed will be the gift with which I shall load you; and,
inasmuch as we have mentioned gold, let me tell you how its use
and enjoyment may bring you greater pleasure. “He who needs
riches least, enjoys riches most.”[8] “Author’s name, please!” you
say. Now, to show you how generous I am, it is my intent to praise
the dicta of other schools. The phrase belongs to Epicurus, or
Metrodorus, or some one of that particular thinking-shop.
But what difference does it make who spoke the words? They
were uttered for the world. He who craves riches feels fear on
their account. No man, however, enjoys a blessing that brings
anxiety; he is always trying to add a little more. While he puzzles
over increasing his wealth, he forgets how to use it. He collects
his accounts, he wears out the pavement in the forum, he turns
over his ledger[9]—in short, he ceases to be master and becomes
a steward. Farewell.
Footnotes
1. Cf. Tacitus, Annals, xv. 44, describing the tortures practiced upon
the Christians.
2. Scylla was a rock on the Italian side of the Straits. Charybdis was a
whirlpool on the Sicillian side. Servius on Vergil, Aeneid, iii, 420 defines the
dextrum as the shore “to the right of those coming from the Ionian sea.”
3. Cf. Juvenal, x. 22 cantabit vacuus coram latrone viator.
4. Cf. the proverb necesse est multos timeat quem multi timent, which is found
in Seneca, de Ira, ii. 11. 4 and often elsewhere.
5. Literally, “is as good as a (priest’s) fillet.”
6. Cf. Tac. Hist. i. 50 inter duos quorum bello solum id scires, deteriorem
fore vicisset.
7. See, for example, Letter xxii.
8. Epicurus, Ep. iii. p. 63. 19 Usener.
9. Named kalendarium because interest was reckoned according to the
Kalends of each month.

LETTER 15
On Brawn and Brains

A

The old Romans had a custom which survived even into my
lifetime. They would add to the opening words of a letter: “If you
are well, it is well; I also am well.” Persons like ourselves would
do well to say. “If you are studying philosophy, it is well.” For this
is just what “being well” means. Without philosophy the mind is
sickly, and the body, too, though it may be very powerful, is strong
only as that of a madman or a lunatic is strong.
This, then, is the sort of health you should primarily cultivate;
the other kind of health comes second, and will involve little
effort, if you wish to be well physically. It is indeed foolish, my
dear Lucilius, and very unsuitable for a cultivated man, to work
hard over developing the muscles and broadening the shoulders
and strengthening the lungs. For although your heavy feeding
produce good results and your sinews grow solid, you can never
be a match, either in strength or in weight, for a first-class bull.
Besides, by overloading the body with food you strangle the soul
and render it less active. Accordingly, limit the flesh as much as
possible, and allow free play to the spirit.
Many inconveniences beset those who devote themselves to
such pursuits. In the first place, they have their exercises, at which
they must work and waste their life-force and render it less fit
to bear a strain or the severer studies. Second, their keen edge
is dulled by heavy eating. Besides, they must take orders from

slaves of the vilest stamp—men who alternate between the oil-
flask[1] and the flagon, whose day passes satisfactorily if they have

got up a good perspiration and quaffed, to make good what they
have lost in sweat, huge draughts of liquor which will sink deeper
because of their fasting. Drinking and sweating—it’s the life of a
dyspeptic![2]
Now there are short and simple exercises which tire the body
rapidly, and so save our time; and time is something of which
we ought to keep strict account. These exercises are running,

brandishing weights, and jumping—high-jumping or broad-
jumping, or the kind which I may call, “the Priest’s dance,”[3] or, in

slighting terms, “the clothes-cleaner’s jump.”[4] Select for practice
any one of these, and you will find it plain and easy.
But whatever you do, come back soon from body to mind. The
mind must be exercised both day and night, for it is nourished by
moderate labour. and this form of exercise need not be hampered
by cold or hot weather, or even by old age. Cultivate that good
which improves with the years.
Of course I do not command you to be always bending over
your books and your writing materials; the mind must have a
change—but a change of such a kind that it is not unnerved, but
merely unbent. Riding in a litter shakes up the body, and does not
interfere with study: one may read, dictate, converse, or listen to
another; nor does walking prevent any of these things.
You need not scorn voice-culture; but I forbid you to practice
raising and lowering your voice by scales and specific intonations.
What if you should next propose to take lessons in walking! If you
consult the sort of person whom starvation has taught new tricks,

you will have someone to regulate your steps, watch every mouth-
ful as you eat, and go to such lengths as you yourself, by enduring

him and believing in him, have encouraged his effrontery to go.

80 THE TAO OF SENECA | VOLUME 1
“What, then?” you will ask; “is my voice to begin at the outset
with shouting and straining the lungs to the utmost?” No; the
natural thing is that it be aroused to such a pitch by easy stages,

just as persons who are wrangling begin with ordinary conver-
sational tones and then pass to shouting at the top of their lungs.

No speaker cries “Help me, citizens!” at the outset of his speech.
Therefore, whenever your spirit’s impulse prompts you, raise
a hubbub, now in louder now in milder tones, according as your
voice, as well as your spirit, shall suggest to you, when you are
moved to such a performance. Then let your voice, when you rein
it in and call it back to earth, come down gently, not collapse;
it should trail off in tones half way between high and low, and
should not abruptly drop from its raving in the uncouth manner
of countrymen. For our purpose is, not to give the voice exercise,
but to make it give us exercise.
You see, I have relieved you of no slight bother; and I shall
throw in a little complementary present—it is Greek, too. Here
is the proverb; it is an excellent one: “The fool’s life is empty of
gratitude and full of fears; its course lies wholly toward the future.”
“Who uttered these words?” you say. The same writer whom I
mentioned before.[5] And what sort of life do you think is meant
by the fool’s life? That of Baba and Isio?[6] No; he means our own,
for we are plunged by our blind desires into ventures which will
harm us, but certainly will never satisfy us; for if we could be
satisfied with anything, we should have been satisfied long ago;
nor do we reflect how pleasant it is to demand nothing, how noble
it is to be contented and not to be dependent upon Fortune.
Therefore continually remind yourself, Lucilius, how many
ambitions you have attained. When you see many ahead of you,
think how many are behind! If you would thank the gods, and be
grateful for your past life, you should contemplate how many men
you have outstripped. But what have you to do with the others?
You have outstripped yourself.
Fix a limit which you will not even desire to pass, should you
have the power. At last, then, away with all these treacherous
goods! They look better to those who hope for them than to those
who have attained them. If there were anything substantial in
them, they would sooner or later satisfy you; as it is, they merely
rouse the drinkers’ thirst. Away with fripperies which only serve
for show! As to what the future’s uncertain lot has in store, why
should I demand of Fortune that she give rather than demand of
myself that I should not crave? And why should l crave? Shall I
heap up my winnings, and forget that man’s lot is unsubstantial?
For what end should I toil? Lo, today is the last; if not, it is near
the last. Farewell.
Footnotes
1. i.e., the prize-ring; the contestants were rubbed with oil before the fight
began.
2. Cardiacus meant, according to Pliny, N. H. xxiii. 1. 24, a sort of dyspepsia
accompanied by fever and perspiration. Compare the man in Juvenal v. 32,
who will not send a spoonful of wine to a friend ill of this complaint.
3. Named from the Salii, or leaping priests of Mars.
4. The fuller, or washerman, cleansed the clothes by leaping and stamping
upon them in the tub.
5. Epicurus, Frag. 491 Usener.
6. Court fools of the period.

LETTER 16

On Philosophy, the Guide of Life

A

It is clear to you, I am sure, Lucilius, that no man can live a happy
life, or even a supportable life, without the study of wisdom; you
know also that a happy life is reached when our wisdom is brought
to completion, but that life is at least endurable even when our
wisdom is only begun. This idea, however, clear though it is, must
be strengthened and implanted more deeply by daily reflection; it
is more important for you to keep the resolutions you have already
made than to go on and make noble ones. You must persevere,
must develop new strength by continuous study, until that which
is only a good inclination becomes a good settled purpose.
Hence you no longer need to come to me with much talk and

protestations; I know that you have made great progress. I under-
stand the feelings which prompt your words; they are not feigned

or specious words. Nevertheless I shall tell you what I think—that
at present I have hopes for you, but not yet perfect trust. And I
wish that you would adopt the same attitude towards yourself;
there is no reason why you should put confidence in yourself
too quickly and readily. Examine yourself; scrutinize and observe

Artwork opposite by Nimit Malavia

84 THE TAO OF SENECA | VOLUME 1
yourself in divers ways; but mark, before all else, whether it is in
philosophy or merely in life itself[1] that you have made progress.
Philosophy is no trick to catch the public; it is not devised for
show. It is a matter, not of words, but of facts. It is not pursued in
order that the day may yield some amusement before it is spent,
or that our leisure may be relieved of a tedium that irks us. It
moulds and constructs the soul; it orders our life, guides our
conduct, shows us what we should do and what we should leave
undone; it sits at the helm and directs our course as we waver
amid uncertainties. Without it, no one can live fearlessly or in
peace of mind. Countless things that happen every hour call for
advice; and such advice is to be sought in philosophy.
Perhaps someone will say: “How can philosophy help me, if
Fate exists? Of what avail is philosophy, if God rules the universe?
Of what avail is it, if Chance governs everything? For not only
is it impossible to change things that are determined, but it is
also impossible to plan beforehand against what is undetermined;
either God has forestalled my plans, and decided what I am to do,
or else Fortune gives no free play to my plans.”
Whether the truth, Lucilius, lies in one or in all of these views,
we must be philosophers; whether Fate binds us down by an
inexorable law, or whether God as arbiter of the universe has
arranged everything, or whether Chance drives and tosses human
affairs without method, philosophy ought to be our defence. She
will encourage us to obey God cheerfully, but Fortune defiantly;
she will teach us to follow God and endure Chance.
But it is not my purpose now to be led into a discussion as to
what is within our own control—if foreknowledge is supreme, or
if a chain of fated events drags us along in its clutches, or if the
sudden and the unexpected play the tyrant over us; I return now
to my warning and my exhortation, that you should not allow
the impulse of your spirit to weaken and grow cold. Hold fast to
it and establish it firmly, in order that what is now impulse may
become a habit of the mind.
If I know you well, you have already been trying to find out,
from the very beginning of my letter, what little contribution it
brings to you. Sift the letter, and you will find it. You need not
wonder at any genius of mine; for as yet I am lavish only with
other men’s property. But why did I say “other men”? Whatever
is well said by anyone is mine. This also is a saying of Epicurus:[2]
“If you live according to nature, you will never be poor; if you live
according to opinion, you will never be rich.”
Nature’s wants are slight; the demands of opinion are boundless.
Suppose that the property of many millionaires is heaped up in
your possession. Assume that fortune carries you far beyond the
limits of a private income, decks you with gold, clothes you in
purple, and brings you to such a degree of luxury and wealth that
you can bury the earth under your marble floors; that you may
not only possess, but tread upon, riches. Add statues, paintings,
and whatever any art has devised for the luxury; you will only
learn from such things to crave still greater.
Natural desires are limited; but those which spring from false
opinion can have no stopping-point. The false has no limits.
When you are travelling on a road, there must be an end; but
when astray, your wanderings are limitless. Recall your steps,
therefore, from idle things, and when you would know whether
that which you seek is based upon a natural or upon a misleading
desire, consider whether it can stop at any definite point. If you
find, after having travelled far, that there is a more distant goal
always in view, you may be sure that this condition is contrary
to nature. Farewell.
Footnotes
1. i.e., have merely advanced in years.
2. Frag. 201 Usener.

LETTER 17
On Philosophy and Riches

A

Cast away everything of that sort, if you are wise; nay, rather that
you may be wise; strive toward a sound mind at top speed and
with your whole strength. If any bond holds you back, untie it, or
sever it. “But,” you say, “my estate delays me; I wish to make such
disposition of it that it may suffice for me when I have nothing
to do, lest either poverty be a burden to me, or I myself a burden
to others.”
You do not seem, when you say this, to know the strength
and power of that good which you are considering. You do
indeed grasp the all important thing, the great benefit which
philosophy confers, but you do not yet discern accurately its
various functions, nor do you yet know how great is the help
we receive from philosophy in everything, everywhere—how, (to
use Cicero’s language,[1]) it not only succours us in the greatest
matters but also descends to the smallest. Take my advice; call
wisdom into consultation; she will advise you not to sit for ever
at your ledger.
Doubtless, your object, what you wish to attain by such
postponement of your studies, is that poverty may not have to
be feared by you. But what if it is something to be desired? Riches
have shut off many a man from the attainment of wisdom; poverty
is unburdened and free from care. When the trumpet sounds,
the poor man knows that he is not being attacked; when there is
a cry of “Fire,”[2] he only seeks a way of escape, and does not ask
what he can save; if the poor man must go to sea, the harbour
does not resound, nor do the wharves bustle with the retinue of
one individual. No throng of slaves surrounds the poor man—
slaves for whose mouths the master must covet the fertile crops
of regions beyond the sea.
It is easy to fill a few stomachs, when they are well trained
and crave nothing else but to be filled. Hunger costs but little;
squeamishness costs much. Poverty is contented with fulfilling
pressing needs.
Why, then, should you reject Philosophy as a comrade?
Even the rich man copies her ways when he is in his senses. If
you wish to have leisure for your mind, either be a poor man, or
resemble a poor man. Study cannot be helpful unless you take
pains to live simply; and living simply is voluntary poverty. Away,
then, with all excuses like: “I have not yet enough; when I have
gained the desired amount, then I shall devote myself wholly to
philosophy.” And yet this ideal, which you are putting off and
placing second to other interests, should be secured first of all; you
should begin with it. You retort: “I wish to acquire something to
live on.” Yes, but learn while you are acquiring it; for if anything
forbids you to live nobly, nothing forbids you to die nobly.
There is no reason why poverty should call us away from
philosophy—no, nor even actual want. For when hastening after
wisdom, we must endure even hunger. Men have endured hunger
when their towns were besieged, and what other reward for their
endurance did they obtain than that they did not fall under the
conqueror’s power? How much greater is the promise of the prize
of everlasting liberty, and the assurance that we need fear neither
God nor man! Even though we starve, we must reach that goal.

88 THE TAO OF SENECA | VOLUME 1
Armies have endured all manner of want, have lived on roots,

and have resisted hunger by means of food too revolting to men-
tion. All this they have suffered to gain a kingdom, and—what is

more marvellous—to gain a kingdom that will be another’s. Will
any man hesitate to endure poverty, in order that he may free his
mind from madness?
Therefore one should not seek to lay up riches first; one may
attain to philosophy, however, even without money for the
journey.
It is indeed so. After you have come to possess all other things,
shall you then wish to possess wisdom also? Is philosophy to
be the last requisite in life—a sort of supplement? Nay, your
plan should be this: be a philosopher now, whether you have
anything or not—for if you have anything, how do you know that
you have not too much already?—but if you have nothing, seek
understanding first, before anything else.
“But,” you say, “I shall lack the necessities of life.” In the first
place, you cannot lack them; because nature demands but little,
and the wise man suits his needs to nature. But if the utmost pinch
of need arrives, he will quickly take leave of life and cease being a
trouble to himself. If, however, his means of existence are meagre
and scanty, he will make the best of them, without being anxious
or worried about anything more than the bare necessities; he will
do justice to his belly and his shoulders; with free and happy
spirit he will laugh at the bustling of rich men, and the flurried
ways of those who are hastening after wealth, and say: “Why of
your own accord postpone your real life to the distant future?
Shall you wait for some interest to fall due, or for some income
on your merchandise, or for a place in the will of some wealthy
old man, when you can be rich here and now. Wisdom offers
wealth in ready money, and pays it over to those in whose eyes
she has made wealth superfluous.” These remarks refer to other
men; you are nearer the rich class. Change the age in which you
live, and you have too much. But in every age, what is enough
remains the same.
I might close my letter at this point, if I had not got you into
bad habits. One cannot greet Parthian royalty without bringing a
gift; and in your case I cannot say farewell without paying a price.
But what of it? I shall borrow from Epicurus:[3] “The acquisition
of riches has been for many men, not an end, but a change, of
troubles.”
I do not wonder. For the fault is not in the wealth, but in the
mind itself. That which had made poverty a burden to us, has
made riches also a burden. Just as it matters little whether you lay
a sick man on a wooden or on a golden bed, for whithersoever
he be moved he will carry his malady with him; so one need not
care whether the diseased mind is bestowed upon riches or upon
poverty. His malady goes with the man. Farewell.
Footnotes
1. Perhaps from the Hortensius; see Müller, Frag. 98, p. 326.
2. Literally, “Water!”
3. Frag. 479 Usener.

LETTER 18
On Festivals and Fasting

A

[If interested, a free audiobook version of this letter
can be found at this web address: tim.blog/18]
It is the month of December, and yet the city is at this very
moment in a sweat. License is given to the general merrymaking.

Everything resounds with mighty preparations—as if the Satur-
nalia differed at all from the usual business day! So true it is that

the difference is nil, that I regard as correct the remark of the
man who said: “Once December was a month; now it is a year.”[1]
If I had you with me, I should be glad to consult you and find
out what you think should be done—whether we ought to make
no change in our daily routine, or whether, in order not to be
out of sympathy with the ways of the public, we should dine in
gayer fashion and doff the toga.[2] As it is now, we Romans have
changed our dress for the sake of pleasure and holiday-making,
though in former times that was only customary when the State
was disturbed and had fallen on evil days.
I am sure that, if I know you aright, playing the part of an
umpire you would have wished that we should be neither like the
liberty-capped[3] throng in all ways, nor in all ways unlike them;
unless, perhaps, this is just the season when we ought to lay down
the law to the soul, and bid it be alone in refraining from pleasures
just when the whole mob has let itself go in pleasures; for this is
the surest proof which a man can get of his own constancy, if he
neither seeks the things which are seductive and allure him to
luxury, nor is led into them.
It shows much more courage to remain dry and sober when
the mob is drunk and vomiting; but it shows greater self-control
to refuse to withdraw oneself and to do what the crowd does, but
in a different way—thus neither making oneself conspicuous nor
becoming one of the crowd. For one may keep holiday without
extravagance.
I am so firmly determined, however, to test the constancy of
your mind that, drawing from the teachings of great men, I shall
give you also a lesson: Set aside a certain number of days, during
which you shall be content with the scantiest and cheapest fare,
with coarse and rough dress, saying to yourself the while: “Is this
the condition that I feared?”
It is precisely in times of immunity from care that the soul
should toughen itself beforehand for occasions of greater stress,
and it is while Fortune is kind that it should fortify itself against
her violence. In days of peace the soldier performs manoeuvres,
throws up earthworks with no enemy in sight, and wearies himself
by gratuitous toil, in order that he may be equal to unavoidable
toil. If you would not have a man flinch when the crisis comes,
train him before it comes. Such is the course which those men[4]
have followed who, in their imitation of poverty, have every
month come almost to want, that they might never recoil from
what they had so often rehearsed.
You need not suppose that I mean meals like Timon’s, or
“paupers’ huts,”[5] or any other device which luxurious millionaires
use to beguile the tedium of their lives. Let the pallet be a real one,
and the coarse cloak; let the bread be hard and grimy. Endure all
this for three or four days at a time, sometimes for more, so that

92 THE TAO OF SENECA | VOLUME 1
it may be a test of yourself instead of a mere hobby. Then, I assure
you, my dear Lucilius, you will leap for joy when filled with a
pennyworth of food, and you will understand that a man’s peace
of mind does not depend upon Fortune; for, even when angry she
grants enough for our needs.
There is no reason, however, why you should think that you
are doing anything great; for you will merely be doing what many
thousands of slaves and many thousands of poor men are doing
every day. But you may credit yourself with this item—that you
will not be doing it under compulsion, and that it will be as easy
for you to endure it permanently as to make the experiment from
time to time. Let us practice our strokes on the “dummy”;[6] let us
become intimate with poverty, so that Fortune may not catch us
off our guard. We shall be rich with all the more comfort, if we
once learn how far poverty is from being a burden.
Even Epicurus, the teacher of pleasure, used to observe stated
intervals, during which he satisfied his hunger in niggardly
fashion; he wished to see whether he thereby fell short of full
and complete happiness, and, if so, by what amount he fell short,
and whether this amount was worth purchasing at the price of
great effort. At any rate, he makes such a statement in the well
known letter written to Polyaenus in the archonship of Charinus.
[7] Indeed, he boasts that he himself lived on less than a penny, but
that Metrodorus, whose progress was not yet so great, needed a
whole penny.
Do you think that there can be fullness on such fare? Yes, and
there is pleasure also—not that shifty and fleeting Pleasure which
needs a fillip now and then, but a pleasure that is steadfast and
sure. For though water, barley-meal, and crusts of barley-bread,
are not a cheerful diet, yet it is the highest kind of Pleasure to be
able to derive pleasure from this sort of food, and to have reduced
one’s needs to that modicum which no unfairness of Fortune can
snatch away.
Even prison fare is more generous; and those who have been
set apart for capital punishment are not so meanly fed by the man
who is to execute them. Therefore, what a noble soul must one
have, to descend of one’s own free will to a diet which even those
who have been sentenced to death have not to fear! This is indeed
forestalling the spearthrusts of Fortune.
So begin, my dear Lucilius, to follow the custom of these men,
and set apart certain days on which you shall withdraw from
your business and make yourself at home with the scantiest fare.
Establish business relations with poverty.
Dare, O my friend, to scorn the sight of wealth,
And mould thyself to kinship with thy God.[8]
For he alone is in kinship with God who has scorned wealth.
Of course I do not forbid you to possess it, but I would have
you reach the point at which you possess it dauntlessly; this can
be accomplished only by persuading yourself that you can live
happily without it as well as with it, and by regarding riches always
as likely to elude you.
But now I must begin to fold up my letter. “Settle your debts
first,” you cry. Here is a draft on Epicurus; he will pay down the
sum: “Ungoverned anger begets madness.”[9] You cannot help
knowing the truth of these words, since you have had not only
slaves, but also enemies.
But indeed this emotion blazes out against all sorts of persons; it
springs from love as much as from hate, and shows itself not less in
serious matters than in jest and sport. And it makes no difference
how important the provocation may be, but into what kind of soul
it penetrates. Similarly with fire; it does not matter how great is the
flame, but what it falls upon. For solid timbers have repelled a very

94 THE TAO OF SENECA | VOLUME 1
great fire; conversely, dry and easily inflammable stuff nourishes
the slightest spark into a conflagration. So it is with anger, my dear
Lucilius; the outcome of a mighty anger is madness, and hence
anger should be avoided, not merely that we may escape excess,
but that we may have a healthy mind. Farewell.
Footnotes
1. i.e., the whole year is a Saturnalia.
2. For a dinner dress.
3. The pilleus was worn by newly freed slaves and by the Roman populace
on festal occasions.
4. The Epicurians. Cf. § 9 and Epicurus, Frag. 158. Usener.
5. Cf. Ep. c. 6 and Martial, iii. 48.
6. The post which gladiators used when preparing themselves for combats
in the arena.
7. Usually identified with Chaerimus, 307-8 B.C. But Wilhelm,
Öster Jahreshefte, V.136, has shown that there is probably no confusion
of names. A Charinus was archon at Athens in 290-89; see Johnson,
Class. Phil. ix. p. 256.
8. Vergil, Aeneid, viii. 364 f.
9. Frag. 484 Usener.

LETTER 19

On Worldliness and Retirement

A

I leap for joy whenever I receive letters from you. For they fill me
with hope; they are now not mere assurances concerning you, but
guarantees. And I beg and pray you to proceed in this course; for
what better request could I make of a friend than one which is to
be made for his own sake? If possible, withdraw yourself from all
the business of which you speak; and if you cannot do this, tear
yourself away. We have dissipated enough of our time already—let
us in old age begin to pack up our baggage.
Surely there is nothing in this that men can begrudge us. We
have spent our lives on the high seas; let us die in harbour. Not
that I would advise you to try to win fame by your retirement;
one’s retirement should neither be paraded nor concealed. Not
concealed, I say, for I shall not go so far in urging you as to expect
you to condemn all men as mad and then seek out for yourself a
hiding-place and oblivion; rather make this your business, that
your retirement be not conspicuous, though it should be obvious.
In the second place, while those whose choice is unhampered
from the start will deliberate on that other question, whether
they wish to pass their lives in obscurity, in your case there is
not a free choice. Your ability and energy have thrust you into
the work of the world; so have the charm of your writings and
the friendships you have made with famous and notable men.

96 THE TAO OF SENECA | VOLUME 1
Renown has already taken you by storm. You may sink yourself
into the depths of obscurity and utterly hide yourself; yet your
earlier acts will reveal you.
You cannot keep lurking in the dark; much of the old gleam
will follow you wherever you fly.
Peace you can claim for yourself without being disliked by
anyone, without any sense of loss, and without any pangs of spirit.
For what will you leave behind you that you can imagine yourself
reluctant to leave? Your clients? But none of these men courts
you for yourself; they merely court something from you. People
used to hunt friends, but now they hunt pelf; if a lonely old man
changes his will, the morning-caller transfers himself to another
door. Great things cannot be bought for small sums; so reckon
up whether it is preferable to leave your own true self, or merely
some of your belongings.
Would that you had had the privilege of growing old amid
the limited circumstances of your origin, and that fortune had
not raised you to such heights! You were removed far from the
sight of wholesome living by your swift rise to prosperity, by your
province, by your position as procurator,[1] and by all that such
things promise; you will next acquire more important duties and
after them still more. And what will be the result?
Why wait until there is nothing left for you to crave? That time
will never come. We hold that there is a succession of causes,
from which fate is woven; similarly, you may be sure, there is a
succession in our desires; for one begins where its predecessor
ends. You have been thrust into an existence which will never of
itself put an end to your wretchedness and your slavery. Withdraw
your chafed neck from the yoke; it is better that it should be cut
off once for all, than galled for ever.
If you retreat to privacy, everything will be on a smaller scale,
but you will be satisfied abundantly; in your present condition,
however, there is no satisfaction in the plenty which is heaped
upon you on all sides. Would you rather be poor and sated, or
rich and hungry? Prosperity is not only greedy, but it also lies
exposed to the greed of others. And as long as nothing satisfies
you, you yourself cannot satisfy others.
“But,” you say, “how can I take my leave?” Any way you
please. Reflect how many hazards you have ventured for the sake
of money, and how much toil you have undertaken for a title!
You must dare something to gain leisure, also—or else grow old
amid the worries of procuratorships[2] abroad and subsequently
of civil duties at home, living in turmoil and in ever fresh floods
of responsibilities, which no man has ever succeeded in avoiding
by unobtrusiveness or by seclusion of life. For what bearing on the
case has your personal desire for a secluded life? Your position in
the world desires the opposite! What if, even now, you allow that
position to grow greater? But all that is added to your successes
will be added to your fears.
At this point I should like to quote a saying of Maecenas, who
spoke the truth when he stood on the very summit:[3] “There’s
thunder even on the loftiest peaks.” If you ask me in what book

these words are found, they occur in the volume entitled Pro-
metheus.

[4] He simply meant to say that these lofty peaks have
their tops surrounded with thunder-storms. But is any power
worth so high a price that a man like you would ever, in order
to obtain it, adopt a style so debauched as that?[5] Maecenas was
indeed a man of parts, who would have left a great pattern for
Roman oratory to follow, had his good fortune not made him
effeminate—nay, had it not emasculated him! An end like his

awaits you also, unless you forthwith shorten sail and—as Mae-
cenas was not willing to do until it was too late—hug the shore!

This saying of Maecenas’s might have squared my account
with you; but I feel sure, knowing you, that you will get out an

98 THE TAO OF SENECA | VOLUME 1
injunction against me, and that you will be unwilling to accept
payment of my debt in such crude and debased currency. However
that may be, I shall draw on the account of Epicurus.[6] He says:
“You must reflect carefully beforehand with whom you are to
eat and drink, rather than what you are to eat and drink. For a
dinner of meats without the company of a friend is like the life
of a lion or a wolf.”
This privilege will not be yours unless you withdraw from
the world; otherwise, you will have as guests only those whom
your slave-secretary[7] sorts out from the throng of callers. It is,
however, a mistake to select your friend in the reception-hall or
to test him at the dinner-table. The most serious misfortune for
a busy man who is overwhelmed by his possessions is, that he
believes men to be his friends when he himself is not a friend to
them, and that he deems his favours to be effective in winning
friends, although, in the case of certain men, the more they owe,
the more they hate. A trifling debt makes a man your debtor; a
large one makes him an enemy.
“What,” you say, “do not kindnesses establish friendships?”
They do, if one has had the privilege of choosing those who are
to receive them, and if they are placed judiciously, instead of being
scattered broadcast.
Therefore, while you are beginning to call your mind your
own, meantime apply this maxim of the wise: consider that it is
more important who receives a thing, than what it is he receives.
Farewell.
Footnotes
1. See the introduction, p. ix.
2. The procurator did the work of a quaestor in an imperial province.
Positions at Rome to which Lucilius might succeed were such as praefectus
annonae, in charge of the grain supply, or praefectus urbi, Director of Public
Safety, and others.
3. And therefore could speak with authority on this point.
4. Perhaps a tragedy, although Seneca uses the word liber to describe it.
Maecenas wrote a Symposium, a work De cultu suo, Octavia, some stray
verse, and perhaps some history. See Seneca, Epp. xcii. and ci.
5. Seneca whimsically pretends to assume that eccentric literary style and
high political position go hand in hand. See also the following sentence.
6. Epicurus, Frag. 542 Usener.
7. A slave kept by every prominant Roman to identify the master’s friends
and dependants.

LETTER 20

On Practicing What You Preach

A

[If interested, a free audiobook version of this letter
can be found at this web address: tim.blog/20]
If you are in good health and if you think yourself worthy of
becoming at last your own master, I am glad. For the credit will be

mine, if I can drag you from the floods in which you are being buf-
feted without hope of emerging. This, however, my dear Lucilius,

I ask and beg of you, on your part, that you let wisdom sink into
your soul, and test your progress, not by mere speech or writings,
but by stoutness of heart and decrease of desire. Prove your words
by your deeds.
Far different is the purpose of those who are speech-making
and trying to win the approbation of a throng of hearers, far
different that of those who allure the ears of young men and idlers
by many-sided or fluent argumentation; philosophy teaches us
to act, not to speak; it exacts of every man that he should live
according to his own standards, that his life should not be out of
harmony with his words, and that, further, his inner life should
be of one hue and not out of harmony with all his activities. This,
I say, is the highest duty and the highest proof of wisdom—that
deed and word should be in accord, that a man should be equal
to himself under all conditions, and always the same.
“But,” you reply, “who can maintain this standard?” Very few,
to be sure; but there are some. It is indeed a hard undertaking,
and I do not say that the philosopher can always keep the same
pace. But he can always travel the same path.
Observe yourself, then, and see whether your dress and your
house are inconsistent, whether you treat yourself lavishly and
your family meanly, whether you eat frugal dinners and yet build
luxurious houses. You should lay hold, once for all, upon a single
norm to live by, and should regulate your whole life according to
this norm. Some men restrict themselves at home, but strut with
swelling port before the public; such discordance is a fault, and
it indicates a wavering mind which cannot yet keep its balance.
And I can tell you, further, whence arise this unsteadiness and
disagreement of action and purpose; it is because no man resolves
upon what he wishes, and, even if he has done so, he does not
persist in it, but jumps the track; not only does he change, but he
returns and slips back to the conduct which he has abandoned
and abjured.
Therefore, to omit the ancient definitions of wisdom and to
include the whole manner of human life, I can be satisfied with
the following: “What is wisdom? Always desiring the same things,
and always refusing the same things.”[1] You may be excused from
adding the little proviso—that what you wish, should be right; since
no man can always be satisfied with the same thing, unless it is
right.
For this reason men do not know what they wish, except at
the actual moment of wishing; no man ever decided once and for
all to desire or to refuse. Judgment varies from day to day, and
changes to the opposite, making many a man pass his life in a kind
of game. Press on, therefore, as you have begun; perhaps you will
be led to perfection, or to a point which you alone understand is
still short of perfection.

102 THE TAO OF SENECA | VOLUME 1
“But what,” you say, “will become of my crowded household
without a household income?” If you stop supporting that crowd,
it will support itself; or perhaps you will learn by the bounty of
poverty what you cannot learn by your own bounty. Poverty will
keep for you your true and tried friends; you will be rid of the men
who were not seeking you for yourself, but for something which
you have. Is it not true, however, that you should love poverty, if
only for this single reason—that it will show you those by whom
you are loved? O when will that time come, when no one shall
tell lies to compliment you!
Accordingly, let your thoughts, your efforts, your desires, help
to make you content with your own self and with the goods that
spring from yourself; and commit all your other prayers to God’s
keeping! What happiness could come closer home to you? Bring
yourself down to humble conditions, from which you cannot be
ejected and in order that you may do so with greater alacrity, the
contribution contained in this letter shall refer to that subject; I
shall bestow it upon you forthwith.
Although you may look askance, Epicurus[2] will once again
be glad to settle my indebtedness: “Believe me, your words
will be more imposing if you sleep on a cot and wear rags. For
in that case you will not be merely saying them; you will be
demonstrating their truth.” I, at any rate, listen in a different spirit
to the utterances of our friend Demetrius, after I have seen him
reclining without even a cloak to cover him, and, more than this,
without rugs to lie upon. He is not only a teacher of the truth, but
a witness to the truth.
“May not a man, however, despise wealth when it lies in his very
pocket?” Of course; he also is great-souled, who sees riches heaped
up round him and, after wondering long and deeply because they
have come into his possession, smiles, and hears rather than feels
that they are his. It means much not to be spoiled by intimacy with
riches; and he is truly great who is poor amidst riches.
“Yes, but I do not know,” you say, “how the man you speak of
will endure poverty, if he falls into it suddenly.” Nor do I, Epicurus,
know whether the poor man you speak of will despise riches,
should he suddenly fall into them; accordingly, in the case of both,
it is the mind that must be appraised, and we must investigate
whether your man is pleased with his poverty, and whether my
man is displeased with his riches. Otherwise, the cot-bed and
the rags are slight proof of his good intentions, if it has not been
made clear that the person concerned endures these trials not
from necessity but from preference.

It is the mark, however, of a noble spirit not to precipitate one-
self into such things[3] on the ground that they are better, but

to practice for them on the ground that they are thus easy to
endure. And they are easy to endure, Lucilius; when, however,
you come to them after long rehearsal, they are even pleasant;
for they contain a sense of freedom from care—and without this
nothing is pleasant.
I hold it essential, therefore, to do as I have told you in a letter
that great men have often done: to reserve a few days in which
we may prepare ourselves for real poverty by means of fancied
poverty. There is all the more reason for doing this, because we
have been steeped in luxury and regard all duties as hard and
onerous. Rather let the soul be roused from its sleep and be
prodded, and let it be reminded that nature has prescribed very
little for us. No man is born rich. Every man, when he first sees
light, is commanded to be content with milk and rags. Such is our
beginning, and yet kingdoms are all too small for us![4] Farewell.
Footnotes
1. Seneca applies to wisdom the definition of friendship, Salust, Catiline, 20. 4
idem velle atque idem nolle, ea demum firma amicitia est.
2. Frag. 206 Usener.

104 THE TAO OF SENECA | VOLUME 1
3. i.e., the life of voluntary poverty.
4. Adapted from the epigram on Alexander the Great, “hic est quem non capit
orbis.” See Plutarch, Alexander, § 6 ὦ παῖ ζήτει σεαυτῷ βασιλείαν ἴσην.
Μακεδονια γάρ σε οὐ χωρεῖ, and Seneca, Ep. cxix. 8.

LETTER 21
On the Renown Which
My Writings Will Bring You

A

Do you conclude that you are having difficulties with those men

about whom you wrote to me? Your greatest difficulty is with your-
self; for you are your own stumbling-block. You do not know what

you want. You are better at approving the right course than at fol-
lowing it out. You see where the true happiness lies, but you have

not the courage to attain it. Let me tell you what it is that hinders
you, inasmuch as you do not of yourself discern it.
You think that this condition, which you are to abandon, is one
of importance, and after resolving upon that ideal state of calm
into which you hope to pass, you are held back by the lustre of
your present life, from which it is your intention to depart, just as
if you were about to fall into a state of filth and darkness. This is
a mistake, Lucilius; to go from your present life into the other is a
promotion. There is the same difference between these two lives
as there is between mere brightness and real light; the latter has
a definite source within itself, the other borrows its radiance; the
one is called forth by an illumination coming from the outside, and
anyone who stands between the source and the object immediately
turns the latter into a dense shadow; but the other has a glow that
comes from within.

106 THE TAO OF SENECA | VOLUME 1
It is your own studies that will make you shine and will render
you eminent, Allow me to mention the case of Epicurus.
He was writing[1] to Idomeneus and trying to recall him from
a showy existence to sure and steadfast renown. Idomeneus
was at that time a minister of state who exercised a rigorous
authority and had important affairs in hand. “If,” said Epicurus,
“you are attracted by fame, my letters will make you more
renowned than all the things which you cherish and which
make you cherished.”
Did Epicurus speak falsely? Who would have known of
Idomeneus, had not the philosopher thus engraved his name
in those letters of his? All the grandees and satraps, even the
king himself, who was petitioned for the title which Idomeneus
sought, are sunk in deep oblivion. Cicero’s letters keep the name
of Atticus from perishing. It would have profited Atticus nothing
to have an Agrippa for a son-in-law, a Tiberius for the husband
of his grand-daughter, and a Drusus Caesar for a great-grandson;
amid these mighty names his name would never be spoken, had
not Cicero bound him to himself.[2]
The deep flood of time will roll over us; some few great men
will raise their heads above it, and, though destined at the last to
depart into the same realms of silence, will battle against oblivion
and maintain their ground for long.
That which Epicurus could promise his friend, this I promise
you, Lucilius. I shall find favour among later generations; I can
take with me names that will endure as long as mine. Our poet
Vergil promised an eternal name to two heroes, and is keeping
his promise:[3]
Blest heroes twain! If power my song possess,
The record of your names shall never be
Erased from out the book of Time, while yet
Aeneas’ tribe shall keep the Capitol,

That rock immovable, and Roman sire
Shall empire hold.
Whenever men have been thrust forward by fortune, whenever
they have become part and parcel of another’s influence, they
have found abundant favour, their houses have been thronged,
only so long as they themselves have kept their position; when
they themselves have left it, they have slipped at once from the
memory of men. But in the case of innate ability, the respect in
which it is held increases, and not only does honour accrue to
the man himself, but whatever has attached itself to his memory
is passed on from one to another.[4]
In order that Idomeneus may not be introduced free of charge
into my letter, he shall make up the indebtedness from his own
account. It was to him that Epicurus addressed the well-known
saying[5] urging him to make Pythocles rich, but not rich in
the vulgar and equivocal way. “If you wish,” said he, “to make
Pythocles rich, do not add to his store of money, but subtract
from his desires.”
This idea is too clear to need explanation, and too clever to need
reinforcement. There is, however, one point on which I would
warn you—not to consider that this statement applies only to
riches; its value will be the same, no matter how you apply it.
“If you wish to make Pythocles honourable, do not add to his
honours, but subtract from his desires”; “if you wish Pythocles to
have pleasure for ever, do not add to his pleasures, but subtract
from his desires”; “if you wish to make Pythocles an old man,
filling his life to the full, do not add to his years, but subtract
from his desires.”
There is no reason why you should hold that these words
belong to Epicurus alone; they are public property. I think we
ought to do in philosophy as they are wont to do in the Senate:
when someone has made a motion, of which I approve to a certain

108 THE TAO OF SENECA | VOLUME 1
extent, I ask him to make his motion in two parts, and I vote for
the part which I approve. So I am all the more glad to repeat the
distinguished words of Epicurus, in order that I may prove to
those who have recourse to him through a bad motive, thinking
that they will have in him a screen for their own vices, that they
must live honourably, no matter what school they follow.
Go to his Garden and read the motto carved there:
“Stranger, here you will do well to tarry; here our highest good
is pleasure.”
The care-taker of that abode, a kindly host, will be ready for
you; he will welcome you with barley-meal and serve you water
also in abundance, with these words: “Have you not been well
entertained?” “This garden,” he says, “does not whet your appetite;
it quenches it. Nor does it make you more thirsty with every
drink; it slakes the thirst by a natural cure, a cure that demands
no fee. This is the ‘pleasure’ in which I have grown old.”
In speaking with you, however, I refer to those desires which
refuse alleviation, which must be bribed to cease. For in regard
to the exceptional desires, which may be postponed, which may
be chastened and checked, I have this one thought to share with
you: a pleasure of that sort is according to our nature, but it is
not according to our needs; one owes nothing to it; whatever is
expended upon it is a free gift. The belly will not listen to advice;
it makes demands, it importunes. And yet it is not a troublesome
creditor; you can send it away at small cost, provided only that you
give it what you owe, not merely all you are able to give. Farewell.
Footnotes
1. Epicurus, Frag. 132 Usener.
2. i.e., Cicero’s letters did more to preserve the name of Atticus than such a
connexion with the imperial house would have done.
3. Aeneid, ix. 446 ff.
4. As in the case of Epicurus and Idomeneus, Cicero and Atticus, Vergil and
Euryalus and Nisus, and Seneca and Lucilius!
5. Frag. 135 Usener.

LETTER 22

On the Futility of Half-Way Measures

A

You understand by this time that you must withdraw yourself
from those showy and depraved pursuits; but you still wish to
know how this may be accomplished. There are certain things
which can be pointed out only by someone who is present. The
physician cannot prescribe by letter the proper time for eating
or bathing; he must feel the pulse. There is an old adage about
gladiators—that they plan their fight in the ring; as they intently
watch, something in the adversary’s glance, some movement of
his hand, even some slight bending of his body, gives a warning.
We can formulate general rules and commit them to writing,
as to what is usually done, or ought to be done; such advice may
be given, not only to our absent friends, but also to succeeding
generations. In regard, however, to that second[1] question—when
or how your plan is to be carried out—no one will advise at long
range; we must take counsel in the presence of the actual situation.
You must be not only present in the body, but watchful in
mind, if you would avail yourself of the fleeting opportunity.
Accordingly, look about you for the opportunity; if you see it,
grasp it, and with all your energy and with all your strength devote
yourself to this task—to rid yourself of those business duties.
Now listen carefully to the opinion which I shall offer; it is
my opinion that you should withdraw either from that kind

110 THE TAO OF SENECA | VOLUME 1
of existence, or else from existence altogether. But I likewise
maintain that you should take a gentle path, that you may loosen
rather than cut the knot which you have bungled so badly in
tying—provided that if there shall be no other way of loosening it,
you may actually cut it. No man is so faint-hearted that he would
rather hang in suspense for ever than drop once for all.
Meanwhile—and this is of first importance—do not hamper
yourself; be content with the business into which you have
lowered yourself, or, as you prefer to have people think, have
tumbled. There is no reason why you should be struggling on to
something further; if you do, you will lose all grounds of excuse,
and men will see that it was not a tumble. The usual explanation
which men offer is wrong: “I was compelled to do it. Suppose
it was against my will; I had to do it.” But no one is compelled
to pursue prosperity at top speed; it means something to call a
halt—even if one does not offer resistance—instead of pressing
eagerly after favouring fortune.
Shall you then be put out with me, if I not only come to advise
you, but also call in others to advise you—wiser heads than my
own, men before whom I am wont to lay any problem upon which
l am pondering? Read the letter of Epicurus[2] which appears on
this matter; it is addressed to Idomeneus. The writer asks him to
hasten as fast as he can, and beat a retreat before some stronger
influence comes between and takes from him the liberty to
withdraw.
But he also adds that one should attempt nothing except at
the time when it can be attempted suitably and seasonably. Then,
when the long-sought occasion comes, let him be up and doing.
Epicurus forbids[3] us to doze when we are meditating escape;
he bids us hope for a safe release from even the hardest trials,
provided that we are not in too great a hurry before the time, nor
too dilatory when the time arrives.
Now, I suppose, you are looking for a Stoic motto also. There is
really no reason why anyone should slander that school to you on
the ground of its rashness; as a matter of fact, its caution is greater
than its courage. You are perhaps expecting the sect to utter such
words as these: “It is base to flinch under a burden. Wrestle with
the duties which you have once undertaken. No man is brave and
earnest if he avoids danger, if his spirit does not grow with the
very difficulty of his task.”
Words like these will indeed be spoken to you, if only your
perseverance shall have an object that is worth while, if only you
will not have to do or to suffer anything unworthy of a good
man; besides, a good man will not waste himself upon mean and
discreditable work or be busy merely for the sake of being busy.
Neither will he, as you imagine, become so involved in ambitious
schemes that he will have continually to endure their ebb and
flow. Nay, when he sees the dangers, uncertainties, and hazards
in which he was formerly tossed about, he will withdraw—not
turning his back to the foe, but falling back little by little to a safe
position.
From business, however, my dear Lucilius, it is easy to escape,
if only you will despise the rewards of business. We are held back
and kept from escaping by thoughts like these: “What then? Shall
I leave behind me these great prospects? Shall I depart at the very
time of harvest? Shall I have no slaves at my side? no retinue for
my litter? no crowd in my reception room?”
Hence men leave such advantages as these with reluctance;
they love the reward of their hardships, but curse the hardships
themselves.
Men complain about their ambitions as they complain about
their mistresses; in other words, if you penetrate their real
feelings, you will find, not hatred, but bickering. Search the minds
of those who cry down what they have desired, who talk about

112 THE TAO OF SENECA | VOLUME 1
escaping from things which they are unable to do without; you
will comprehend that they are lingering of their own free will in
a situation which they declare they find it hard and wretched to
endure.
It is so, my dear Lucilius; there are a few men whom slavery
holds fast, but there are many more who hold fast to slavery.
If, however, you intend to be rid of this slavery; if freedom
is genuinely pleasing in your eyes; and if you seek counsel
for this one purpose—that you may have the good fortune to
accomplish this purpose without perpetual annoyance—how can
the whole company of Stoic thinkers fail to approve your course?
Zeno, Chrysippus, and all their kind will give you advice that is
temperate, honourable, and suitable.
But if you keep turning round and looking about, in order
to see how much you may carry away with you, and how much
money you may keep to equip yourself for the life of leisure, you
will never find a way out. No man can swim ashore and take his
baggage with him. Rise to a higher life, with the favour of the
gods; but let it not be favour of such a kind as the gods give to
men when with kind and genial faces they bestow magnificent ills,
justified in so doing by the one fact that the things which irritate
and torture have been bestowed in answer to prayer.
I was just putting the seal upon this letter; but it must be
broken again, in order that it may go to you with its customary
contribution, bearing with it some noble word. And lo, here is
one that occurs to my mind; I do not know whether its truth or its
nobility of utterance is the greater. “Spoken by whom?” you ask.
By Epicurus;[4] for I am still appropriating other men’s belongings.
The words are: “Everyone goes out of life just as if he had but

lately entered it.” Take anyone off his guard, young, old, or middle-
aged; you will find that all are equally afraid of death, and equally

ignorant of life. No one has anything finished, because we have
kept putting off into the future all our undertakings.[5] No thought
in the quotation given above pleases me more than that it taunts
old men with being infants.
“No one,” he says, “leaves this world in a different manner from
one who has just been born.” That is not true; for we are worse
when we die than when we were born; but it is our fault, and not
that of Nature. Nature should scold us, saying: “What does this
mean? I brought you into the world without desires or fears, free
from superstition, treachery and the other curses. Go forth as you
were when you entered!”
A man has caught the message of wisdom, if he can die as free
from care as he was at birth; but as it is we are all a-flutter at the
approach of the dreaded end. Our courage fails us, our cheeks
blanch; our tears fall, though they are unavailing. But what is
baser than to fret at the very threshold of peace?
The reason, however is, that we are stripped of all our goods,
we have jettisoned our cargo of life and are in distress; for no part
of it has been packed in the hold; it has all been heaved overboard
and has drifted away. Men do not care how nobly they live, but
only how long, although it is within the reach of every man to live
nobly, but within no man’s power to live long. Farewell.
Footnotes
1. The first question, “Shall I withdraw from the world?” has been answered,
apparently by Lucilius himself. The second was, “How can I accomplish
this?” Seneca pretends to answer it, although he feels that this should be
done in personal conference rather than by writing.
2. See the preceeding letter of Seneca.
3. Frag. 133 Usener.
4. Frag. 495 Usener.
5. i.e., the old man is like the infant in this, also—that he can look back upon
nothing which he has finished, because he has always put off finishing
things.

Japanese: Michi. In Japanese, this character can
also be read do (long vowel), as found in
bushido, aikido and judo (i.e. “The way of...”).
It can be read in Chinese as tao or dao,
as found in the Tao Te Ching.
English: Way or path.
Calligrapher: Noriko Lake

LETTER 23
On the True Joy Which
Comes from Philosophy

A

Do you suppose that I shall write you how kindly the winter sea-
son has dealt with us—a short season and a mild one—or what a

nasty spring we are having—cold weather out of season—and all
the other trivialities which people write when they are at a loss for
topics of conversation? No; I shall communicate something which
may help both you and myself. And what shall this “something”
be, if not an exhortation to soundness of mind? Do you ask what
is the foundation of a sound mind? It is, not to find joy in useless
things. I said that it was the foundation; it is really the pinnacle.
We have reached the heights if we know what it is that we find
joy in and if we have not placed our happiness in the control of
externals. The man who is goaded ahead by hope of anything,
though it be within reach, though it be easy of access, and though
his ambitions have never played him false, is troubled and unsure
of himself.
Above all, my dear Lucilius, make this your business: learn
how to feel joy.
Do you think that I am now robbing you of many pleasures
when I try to do away with the gifts of chance, when I counsel the
avoidance of hope, the sweetest thing that gladdens our hearts?
Quite the contrary; I do not wish you ever to be deprived of

116 THE TAO OF SENECA | VOLUME 1
gladness. I would have it born in your house; and it is born there,
if only it be inside of you. Other objects of cheer do not fill a man’s
bosom; they merely smooth his brow and are inconstant—unless
perhaps you believe that he who laughs has joy. The very soul
must be happy and confident, lifted above every circumstance.
Real joy, believe me, is a stern matter. Can one, do you think,
despise death with a care-free countenance, or with a “blithe and
gay” expression, as our young dandies are accustomed to say?
Or can one thus open his door to poverty, or hold the curb on
his pleasures, or contemplate the endurance of pain? He who
ponders these things[1] in his heart is indeed full of joy; but it is
not a cheerful joy. It is just this joy, however, of which I would
have you become the owner; for it will never fail you when once
you have found its source.
The yield of poor mines is on the surface; those are really rich
whose veins lurk deep, and they will make more bountiful returns
to him who delves unceasingly. So too those baubles which delight
the common crowd afford but a thin pleasure, laid on as a coating,
and even joy that is only plated lacks a real basis. But the joy of
which I speak, that to which I am endeavouring to lead you, is
something solid, disclosing itself the more fully as you penetrate
into it.
Therefore I pray you, my dearest Lucilius, do the one thing
that can render you really happy: cast aside and trample under
foot all the things that glitter outwardly and are held out to you[2]
by another or as obtainable from another; look toward the true
good, and rejoice only in that which comes from your own store.
And what do I mean by “from your own store”? I mean from
your very self, that which is the best part of you. The frail body,
also, even though we can accomplish nothing without it, is to be
regarded as necessary rather than as important; it involves us in
vain pleasures, short-lived, and soon to be regretted, which, unless
they are reined in by extreme self-control, will be transformed
into the opposite. This is what I mean: pleasure, unless it has
been kept within bounds, tends to rush headlong into the abyss
of sorrow.
But it is hard to keep within bounds in that which you believe
to be good. The real good may be coveted with safety.
Do you ask me what this real good is, and whence it derives? I
will tell you: it comes from a good conscience, from honourable
purposes, from right actions, from contempt of the gifts of chance,
from an even and calm way of living which treads but one path.
For men who leap from one purpose to another, or do not even
leap but are carried over by a sort of hazard—how can such
wavering and unstable persons possess any good that is fixed
and lasting?
There are only a few who control themselves and their affairs
by a guiding purpose; the rest do not proceed; they are merely
swept along, like objects afloat in a river. And of these objects,
some are held back by sluggish waters and are transported gently;
others are torn along by a more violent current; some, which are
nearest the bank, are left there as the current slackens; and others
are carried out to sea by the onrush of the stream. Therefore, we
should decide what we wish, and abide by the decision.
Now is the time for me to pay my debt. I can give you a saying
of your friend Epicurus[3] and thus clear this letter of its obligation.
“It is bothersome always to be beginning life.” Or another, which
will perhaps express the meaning better: “They live ill who are
always beginning to live.”
You are right in asking why; the saying certainly stands in need
of a commentary. It is because the life of such persons is always
incomplete. But a man cannot stand prepared for the approach of
death if he has just begun to live. We must make it our aim already

118 THE TAO OF SENECA | VOLUME 1
to have lived long enough. No one deems that he has done so, if
he is just on the point of planning his life.
You need not think that there are few of this kind; practically
everyone is of such a stamp. Some men, indeed, only begin to
live when it is time for them to leave off living. And if this seems
surprising to you, I shall add that which will surprise you still
more: Some men have left off living before they have begun.
Farewell.
Footnotes
1. Death, poverty, temptation, and suffering.
2. By the various sects which professed to teach how happiness is to be
obtained.
3. Frag. 493 Usener.

LETTER 24
On Despising Death[1]

A

You write me that you are anxious about the result of a lawsuit,
with which an angry opponent is threatening you; and you expect
me to advise you to picture to yourself a happier issue, and to rest

in the allurements of hope. Why, indeed, is it necessary to sum-
mon trouble—which must be endured soon enough when it has

once arrived, or to anticipate trouble and ruin the present through
fear of the future? It is indeed foolish to be unhappy now because
you may be unhappy at some future time.
But I shall conduct you to peace of mind by another route:
if you would put off all worry, assume that what you fear may
happen will certainly happen in any event; whatever the trouble
may be, measure it in your own mind, and estimate the amount
of your fear. You will thus understand that what you fear is either
insignificant or short-lived.
And you need not spend a long time in gathering illustrations
which will strengthen you; every epoch has produced them. Let
your thoughts travel into any era of Roman or foreign history,
and there will throng before you notable examples of high
achievement or of high endeavour.
If you lose this case, can anything more severe happen to
you than being sent into exile or led to prison? Is there a worse
fate that any man may fear than being burned or being killed?

120 THE TAO OF SENECA | VOLUME 1
Name such penalties one by one, and mention the men who have
scorned them; one does not need to hunt for them—it is simply
a matter of selection.
Sentence of conviction was borne by Rutilius as if the injustice
of the decision were the only thing which annoyed him. Exile
was endured by Metellus with courage, by Rutilius even with
gladness; for the former consented to come back only because
his country called him; the latter refused to return when Sulla
summoned him—and nobody in those days said “No” to Sulla!
Socrates in prison discoursed, and declined to flee when certain
persons gave him the opportunity; he remained there, in order
to free mankind from the fear of two most grievous things, death
and imprisonment.
Mucius put his hand into the fire. It is painful to be burned; but
how much more painful to inflict such suffering upon oneself!
Here was a man of no learning, not primed to face death and pain
by any words of wisdom, and equipped only with the courage of
a soldier, who punished himself for his fruitless daring; he stood
and watched his own right hand falling away piecemeal on the
enemy’s brazier,[2] nor did he withdraw the dissolving limb, with
its uncovered bones, until his foe removed the fire. He might have
accomplished something more successful in that camp, but never
anything more brave. See how much keener a brave man is to lay
hold of danger than a cruel man is to inflict it: Porsenna was more
ready to pardon Mucius for wishing to slay him than Mucius to
pardon himself for failing to slay Porsenna!
“Oh,” say you, “those stories have been droned to death in all
the schools; pretty soon, when you reach the topic ‘On Despising
Death,’ you will be telling me about Cato.” But why should I not tell
you about Cato, how he read Plato’s[3] book on that last glorious
night, with a sword laid at his pillow? He had provided these two
requisites for his last moments—the first, that he might have the
will to die, and the second, that he might have the means. So he
put his affairs in order—as well as one could put in order that
which was ruined and near its end—and thought that he ought
to see to it that no one should have the power to slay or the good
fortune to save[4] Cato.
Drawing the sword—which he had kept unstained from all
bloodshed against the final day, he cried: “Fortune, you have
accomplished nothing by resisting all my endeavours. I have
fought, till now, for my country’s freedom, and not for my own,
I did not strive so doggedly to be free, but only to live among the
free. Now, since the affairs of mankind are beyond hope, let Cato
be withdrawn to safety.”
So saying, he inflicted a mortal wound upon his body. After the
physicians had bound it up, Cato had less blood and less strength,
but no less courage; angered now not only at Caesar but also at
himself, he rallied his unarmed hands against his wound, and
expelled, rather than dismissed, that noble soul which had been
so defiant of all worldly power.
I am not now heaping up these illustrations for the purpose of
exercising my wit, but for the purpose of encouraging you to face
that which is thought to be most terrible. And I shall encourage
you all the more easily by showing that not only resolute men have
despised that moment when the soul breathes its last, but that
certain persons, who were craven in other respects, have equalled
in this regard the courage of the bravest. Take, for example, Scipio,
the father-in-law of Gnaeus Pompeius: he was driven back upon
the African coast by a head-wind and saw his ship in the power
of the enemy. He therefore pierced his body with a sword; and
when they asked where the commander was, he replied: “All is
well with the commander.”
These words brought him up to the level of his ancestors and
suffered not the glory which fate gave to the Scipios in Africa[5] to

122 THE TAO OF SENECA | VOLUME 1
lose its continuity. It was a great deed to conquer Carthage, but a
greater deed to conquer death. “All is well with the commander!”
Ought a general to die otherwise, especially one of Cato’s generals?
I shall not refer you to history, or collect examples of those
men who throughout the ages have despised death; for they are
very many. Consider these times of ours, whose enervation and
over-refinement call forth our complaints; they nevertheless will
include men of every rank, of every lot in life, and of every age,
who have cut short their misfortunes by death.
Believe me, Lucilius; death is so little to be feared that through
its good offices nothing is to be feared.
Therefore, when your enemy threatens, listen unconcernedly.
Although your conscience makes you confident, yet, since many
things have weight which are outside your case,[6] both hope for
that which is utterly just, and prepare yourself against that which
is utterly unjust. Remember, however, before all else, to strip
things of all that disturbs and confuses, and to see what each is
at bottom; you will then comprehend that they contain nothing
fearful except the actual fear.
That you see happening to boys happens also to ourselves, who
are only slightly bigger boys: when those whom they love, with
whom they daily associate, with whom they play, appear with
masks on, the boys are frightened out of their wits. We should
strip the mask, not only from men, but from things, and restore
to each object its own aspect.
“Why dost thou[7] hold up before my eyes swords, fires, and a
throng of executioners raging about thee? Take away all that vain
show, behind which thou lurkest and scarest fools! Ah! thou art
naught but Death, whom only yesterday a manservant of mine
and a maid-servant did despise! Why dost thou again unfold
and spread before me, with all that great display, the whip and
the rack? Why are those engines of torture made ready, one for
each several member of the body, and all the other innumerable
machines for tearing a man apart piecemeal? Away with all such
stuff, which makes us numb with terror! And thou, silence the
groans the cries, and the bitter shrieks ground out of the victim as
he is torn on the rack! Forsooth thou are naught but Pain, scorned
by yonder gout-ridden wretch, endured by yonder dyspeptic in
the midst of his dainties, borne bravely by the girl in travail. Slight
thou art, if I can bear thee; short thou art if I cannot bear thee!”
Ponder these words which you have often heard and often
uttered. Moreover, prove by the result whether that which you
have heard and uttered is true. For there is a very disgraceful
charge often brought against our school—that we deal with the
words, and not with the deeds, of philosophy.
What, have you only at this moment learned that death is
hanging over your head, at this moment exile, at this moment
grief? You were born to these perils. Let us think of everything
that can happen as something which will happen.
I know that you have really done what I advise you to do; I now
warn you not to drown your soul in these petty anxieties of yours;
if you do, the soul will be dulled and will have too little vigour
left when the time comes for it to arise. Remove the mind from
this case of yours to the case of men in general. Say to yourself
that our petty bodies are mortal and frail; pain can reach them
from other sources than from wrong or the might of the stronger.
Our pleasures themselves become torments; banquets bring
indigestion, carousals paralysis of the muscles and palsy, sensual
habits affect the feet, the hands, and every joint of the body.
I may become a poor man; I shall then be one among many. I
may be exiled; I shall then regard myself as born in the place to
which I shall be sent. They may put me in chains. What then? Am
I free from bonds now? Behold this clogging burden of a body, to
which nature has fettered me! “I shall die,” you say; you mean to

124 THE TAO OF SENECA | VOLUME 1
say “I shall cease to run the risk of sickness; I shall cease to run
the risk of imprisonment; I shall cease to run the risk of death.”
I am not so foolish as to go through at this juncture the
arguments which Epicurus harps upon, and say that the terrors
of the world below are idle—that Ixion does not whirl round on
his wheel, that Sisyphus does not shoulder his stone uphill, that
a man’s entrails cannot be restored and devoured every day;[8]
no one is so childish as to fear Cerberus, or the shadows, or
the spectral garb of those who are held together by naught but
their unfleshed bones. Death either annihilates us or strips us
bare. If we are then released, there remains the better part, after
the burden has been withdrawn; if we are annihilated, nothing
remains; good and bad are alike removed.
Allow me at this point to quote a verse of yours, first suggesting
that, when you wrote it, you meant it for yourself no less than
for others. It is ignoble to say one thing and mean another; and
how much more ignoble to write one thing and mean another!
I remember one day you were handling the well-known
commonplace—that we do not suddenly fall on death, but
advance towards it by slight degrees; we die every day.
For every day a little of our life is taken from us; even when we
are growing, our life is on the wane. We lose our childhood, then
our boyhood, and then our youth. Counting even yesterday, all
past time is lost time; the very day which we are now spending
is shared between ourselves and death. It is not the last drop that
empties the water-clock, but all that which previously has flowed
out; similarly, the final hour when we cease to exist does not of
itself bring death; it merely of itself completes the death-process.
We reach death at that moment, but we have been a long time
on the way.
In describing this situation, you said in your customary, style
(for you are always impressive, but never more pungent than
when you are putting the truth in appropriate words):
Not single is the death which comes; the death
Which takes us off is but the last of all.
I prefer that you should read your own words rather than my
letter; for then it will be clear to you that this death, of which we
are afraid, is the last but not the only death.
I see what you are looking for; you are asking what I have packed
into my letter, what inspiriting saying from some master-mind,
what useful precept. So I shall send you something dealing with
this very subject which has been under discussion. Epicurus[9]
upbraids those who crave, as much as those who shrink from,
death: “It is absurd,” he says, “to run towards death because you
are tired of life, when it is your manner of life that has made you
run towards death.”
And in another passage:[10] “What is so absurd as to seek death,
when it is through fear of death that you have robbed your life of
peace?” And you may add a third statement, of the same stamp:[11]
“Men are so thoughtless, nay, so mad, that some, through fear of
death, force themselves to die.”
Whichever of these ideas you ponder, you will strengthen your
mind for the endurance alike of death and of life. For we need to
be warned and strengthened in both directions—not to love or
to hate life overmuch; even when reason advises us to make an
end of it, the impulse is not to be adopted without reflection or
at headlong speed.
The grave and wise man should not beat a hasty retreat from
life; he should make a becoming exit. And above all, he should
avoid the weakness which has taken possession of so many—the
lust for death. For just as there is an unreflecting tendency of

126 THE TAO OF SENECA | VOLUME 1
the mind towards other things, so, my dear Lucilius, there is an
unreflecting tendency towards death; this often seizes upon the
noblest and most spirited men, as well as upon the craven and the
abject. The former despise life; the latter find it irksome.
Others also are moved by a satiety of doing and seeing the
same things, and not so much by a hatred of life as because they
are cloyed with it. We slip into this condition, while philosophy
itself pushes us on, and we say; “How long must I endure the
same things? Shall I continue to wake and sleep, be hungry and
be cloyed, shiver and perspire? There is an end to nothing; all
things are connected in a sort of circle; they flee and they are
pursued. Night is close at the heels of day, day at the heels of night;
summer ends in autumn, winter rushes after autumn, and winter
softens into spring; all nature in this way passes, only to return.
I do nothing new; I see nothing new; sooner or later one sickens
of this, also.” There are many who think that living is not painful,
but superfluous. Farewell.
Footnotes
1. Seneca’s theme is suggested by the fear which possesses Lucilius as to
the issue of a lawsuit. This fear is taken as typical of all fears, and Seneca
devotes most of his letter to the greatest fear of all—fear of death.
2. The foculus in this version of the story was evidently a movable fire, a
brazier.
3. The Phaedo on the immortality of the soul.
4. i.e., to save and bring back to Rome as prisoner.
5. Scipio Africanus defeated Hannibal at Zama in 202 B.C. Scipio
Aemilianus, also surnamed Africanus, was by adoption the grandson of
Hannibal’s conqueror. He captured Carthage in the Third Punic War, 146
B.C. The Scipio mentioned by Seneca died in 46 B.C.
6. He refers to the lawsuit, as again in § 16.
7. An apostrophe to Death and Pain.
8. As mythology describes the treatment of Tityus or of Prometheus.
9. Frag. 496 Usener.
10. Frag. 498 Usener.
11. Frag. 497 Usener.

LETTER 25
On Reformation
A

With regard to these two friends of ours, we must proceed along
different lines; the faults of the one are to be corrected, the other’s
are to be crushed out. I shall take every liberty; for I do not love
this one[1] if I am unwilling to hurt his feelings. “What,” you say,
“do you expect to keep a forty-year-old ward under your tutelage?
Consider his age, how hardened it now is, and past handling!
Such a man cannot be re-shaped; only young minds are
moulded.” I do not know whether I shall make progress; but I
should prefer to lack success rather than to lack faith. You need
not despair of curing sick men even when the disease is chronic, if
only you hold out against excess and force them to do and submit
to many things against their will. As regards our other friend I
am not sufficiently confident, either, except for the fact that he
still has sense of shame enough to blush for his sins. This modesty
should be fostered; so long as it endures in his soul, there is some
room for hope. But as for this veteran of yours, I think we should
deal more carefully with him, that he may not become desperate
about himself.
There is no better time to approach him than now, when he has
an interval of rest and seems like one who has corrected his faults.
Others have been cheated by this interval of virtue on his part,
but he does not cheat me. I feel sure that these faults will return,

128 THE TAO OF SENECA | VOLUME 1
as it were, with compound interest, for just now, I am certain,
they are in abeyance but not absent. I shall devote some time to
the matter, and try to see whether or not something can be done.
But do you yourself, as indeed you are doing, show me that
you are stout-hearted; lighten your baggage for the march. None
of our possessions is essential. Let us return to the law of nature;
for then riches are laid up for us. The things which we actually
need are free for all, or else cheap; nature craves only bread and
water. No one is poor according to this standard; when a man
has limited his desires within these bounds, he can challenge the
happiness of Jove himself, as Epicurus says. I must insert in this
letter one or two more of his sayings:[2]
“Do everything as if Epicurus were watching you.” There is no
real doubt that it is good for one to have appointed a guardian
over oneself, and to have someone whom you may look up to,
someone whom you may regard as a witness of your thoughts. It
is, indeed, nobler by far to live as you would live under the eyes
of some good man, always at your side; but nevertheless I am
content if you only act, in whatever you do, as you would act if
anyone at all were looking on; because solitude prompts us to all
kinds of evil.
And when you have progressed so far that you have also respect
for yourself, you may send away your attendant; but until then,
set as a guard over yourself the authority of some man, whether
your choice be the great Cato or Scipio, or Laelius—or any man
in whose presence even abandoned wretches would check their
bad impulses. Meantime, you are engaged in making of yourself
the sort of person in whose company you would not dare to sin.
When this aim has been accomplished and you begin to hold
yourself in some esteem, I shall gradually allow you to do what
Epicurus, in another passage, suggests:[3] “The time when you
should most of all withdraw into yourself is when you are forced
to be in a crowd.”
You ought to make yourself of a different stamp from the
multitude. Therefore, while it is not yet safe to withdraw into
solitude,[4] seek out certain individuals; for everyone is better off
in the company of somebody or other—no matter who—than in
his own company alone. “The time when you should most of all
withdraw into yourself is when you are forced to be in a crowd.”
Yes, provided that you are a good, tranquil, and self-restrained
man; otherwise, you had better withdraw into a crowd in order
to get away from your self. Alone, you are too close to a rascal.
Farewell.
Footnotes
1. The second friend, whose faults are to be crushed out. He proves to be
some forty years old; the other is a youth.
2. Frag. 211 Usener.
3. Frag. 209 Usener.
4. Because “solitude promts to evil,” § 5.

LETTER 26
On Old Age and Death

A

I was just lately telling you that I was within sight of old age.[1]
I am now afraid that I have left old age behind me. For some
other word would now apply to my years, or at any rate to my
body; since old age means a time of life that is weary rather than
crushed. You may rate me in the worn-out class—of those who
are nearing the end.
Nevertheless, I offer thanks to myself, with you as witness; for
I feel that age has done no damage to my mind, though I feel its
effects on my constitution. Only my vices, and the outward aids to
these vices, have reached senility; my mind is strong and rejoices
that it has but slight connexion with the body. It has laid aside
the greater part of its load. It is alert; it takes issue with me on
the subject of old age; it declares that old age is its time of bloom.
Let me take it at its word, and let it make the most of the
advantages it possesses. The mind bids me do some thinking
and consider how much of this peace of spirit and moderation
of character I owe to wisdom and how much to my time of life;
it bids me distinguish carefully what I cannot do and what I do
not want to do. . . .[2] For why should one complain or regard it
as a disadvantage, if powers which ought to come to an end have
failed?
“But,” you say, “it is the greatest possible disadvantage to be
worn out and to die off, or rather, if I may speak literally, to melt
away! For we are not suddenly smitten and laid low; we are worn
away, and every day reduces our powers to a certain extent.”
But is there any better end to it all than to glide off to one’s
proper haven, when nature slips the cable? Not that there is
anything painful in a shock and a sudden departure from
existence; it is merely because this other way of departure is
easy—a gradual withdrawal. I, at any rate, as if the test were at
hand and the day were come which is to pronounce its decision
concerning all the years of my life, watch over myself and
commune thus with myself:
“The showing which we have made up to the present time,
in word or deed, counts for nothing. All this is but a trifling
and deceitful pledge of our spirit, and is wrapped in much
charlatanism. I shall leave it to Death to determine what progress
I have made. Therefore with no faint heart I am making ready for
the day when, putting aside all stage artifice and actor’s rouge,
I am to pass judgment upon myself—whether I am merely
declaiming brave sentiments, or whether I really feel them;
whether all the bold threats I have uttered against fortune are a
pretence and a farce.
Put aside the opinion of the world; it is always wavering
and always takes both sides. Put aside the studies which you
have pursued throughout your life; Death will deliver the final
judgment in your case. This is what I mean: your debates and
learned talks, your maxims gathered from the teachings of the
wise, your cultured conversation—all these afford no proof of the
real strength of your soul. Even the most timid man can deliver a
bold speech. What you have done in the past will be manifest only
at the time when you draw your last breath. I accept the terms; I
do not shrink from the decision.”

132 THE TAO OF SENECA | VOLUME 1
This is what I say to myself, but I would have you think that
I have said it to you also. You are younger; but what does that
matter? There is no fixed count of our years. You do not know
where death awaits you; so be ready for it everywhere.
I was just intending to stop, and my hand was making ready for
the closing sentence; but the rites are still to be performed and the
travelling money for the letter disbursed. And just assume that I
am not telling where I intend to borrow the necessary sum; you
know upon whose coffers I depend. Wait for me but a moment,
and I will pay you from my own account;[3] meanwhile, Epicurus
will oblige me with these words:[4] “Think on death,” or rather, if
you prefer the phrase, on “migration to heaven.”
The meaning is clear—that it is a wonderful thing to learn
thoroughly how to die. You may deem it superfluous to learn a
text that can be used only once; but that is just the reason why we
ought to think on a thing. When we can never prove whether we
really know a thing, we must always be learning it.
“Think on death.” In saying this, he bids us think on freedom.
He who has learned to die has unlearned slavery; he is above any
external power, or, at any rate, he is beyond it. What terrors have
prisons and bonds and bars for him? His way out is clear. There
is only one chain which binds us to life, and that is the love of
life. The chain may not be cast off, but it may be rubbed away, so
that, when necessity shall demand, nothing may retard or hinder
us from being ready to do at once that which at some time we are
bound to do. Farewell.
Footnotes
1. See the twelfth letter. Seneca was by this time at least sixty-five years old,
and probably older.
2. This passage is hopelessly corrupt. The course of the argument requires
something like this: For it is just as much to my advantage not to be able
to do what I do not want to do, as it is to be able to do whatever gives me
pleasure.
3. i.e., the money will be brought from home—the saying will be one of
Seneca’s own.
4. Epicurus, Frag. 205 Usener.

LETTER 27

On the Good Which Abides

A

“What,” say you, “are you giving me advice? Indeed, have you
already advised yourself, already corrected your own faults? Is this
the reason why you have leisure to reform other men?” No, I am
not so shameless as to undertake to cure my fellow-men when I
am ill myself. I am, however, discussing with you troubles which
concern us both, and sharing the remedy with you, just as if we
were lying ill in the same hospital. Listen to me, therefore, as you
would if I were talking to myself. I am admitting you to my inmost
thoughts, and am having it out with myself, merely making use
of you as my pretext.
I keep crying out to myself: “Count your years, and you will
be ashamed to desire and pursue the same things you desired
in your boyhood days. Of this one thing make sure against
your dying day—let your faults die before you die. Away with
those disordered pleasures, which must be dearly paid for; it is
not only those which are to come that harm me, but also those
which have come and gone. Just as crimes, even if they have not
been detected when they were committed, do not allow anxiety
to end with them; so with guilty pleasures, regret remains even
after the pleasures are over. They are not substantial, they are not
trustworthy; even if they do not harm us, they are fleeting.
Cast about rather for some good which will abide. But there can
be no such good except as the soul discovers it for itself within
itself. Virtue alone affords everlasting and peace-giving joy; even
if some obstacle arise, it is but like an intervening cloud, which
floats beneath the sun but never prevails against it.”
When will it be your lot to attain this joy? Thus far, you have
indeed not been sluggish, but you must quicken your pace. Much
toil remains; to confront it, you must yourself lavish all your
waking hours, and all your efforts, if you wish the result to be
accomplished. This matter cannot be delegated to someone else.
The other kind of literary activity[1] admits of outside assistance.
Within our own time there was a certain rich man named
Calvisius Sabinus; he had the bank-account and the brains of a
freedman.[2] I never saw a man whose good fortune was a greater
offence against propriety. His memory was so faulty that he would
sometimes forget the name of Ulysses, or Achilles, or Priam—
names which we know as well as we know those of our own
attendants. No major-domo in his dotage, who cannot give men
their right names, but is compelled to invent names for them—no
such man, I say, calls off the names[3] of his master’s tribesmen
so atrociously as Sabinus used to call off the Trojan and Achaean
heroes. But none the less did he desire to appear learned.
So he devised this short cut to learning: he paid fabulous prices
for slaves—one to know Homer by heart and another to know
Hesiod; he also delegated a special slave to each of the nine lyric
poets. You need not wonder that he paid high prices for these
slaves; if he did not find them ready to hand he had them made to
order. After collecting this retinue, he began to make life miserable
for his guests; he would keep these fellows at the foot of his couch,
and ask them from time to time for verses which he might repeat,
and then frequently break down in the middle of a word.

136 THE TAO OF SENECA | VOLUME 1
Satellius Quadratus, a feeder, and consequently a fawner, upon
addle-pated millionaires, and also (for this quality goes with the
other two) a flouter of them, suggested to Sabinus that he should
have philologists to gather up the bits.[4] Sabinus remarked that
each slave cost him one hundred thousand sesterces; Satellius
replied: “You might have bought as many book-cases for a smaller
sum.” But Sabinus held to the opinion that what any member of
his household knew, he himself knew also.
This same Satellius began to advise Sabinus to take wrestling
lessons—sickly, pale, and thin as he was, Sabinus answered: “How
can I? I can scarcely stay alive now.” “Don’t say that, I implore you,”
replied the other, “consider how many perfectly healthy slaves you
have!” No man is able to borrow or buy a sound mind; in fact,
as it seems to me, even though sound minds were for sale, they
would not find buyers. Depraved minds, however, are bought
and sold every day.
But let me pay off my debt and say farewell: “Real wealth is
poverty adjusted to the law of Nature.”[5] Epicurus has this saying
in various ways and contexts; but it can never be repeated too
often, since it can never be learned too well. For some persons
the remedy should be merely prescribed; in the case of others, it
should be forced down their throats. Farewell.
Footnotes
1. i.e., ordinary studies, or literature, as contrasted with philosophy.
2. Compare with the following the vulgarities of Trimalchio in the Satire of
Petronius, and the bad taste of Nasidienus in Horace (Sat. ii. 8).

3. At the salutatio, or morning call. The position of nomenclator, “caller-of-
names,” was originally devoted more strictly to political purposes. Here it is

primarily social.
4. i.e., all the ideas that dropped out of the head of Sabinus. The slave who
picked up the crumbs was called analecta.
5. Epicurus, Frag. 477 Usener.

LETTER 28

On Travel as a Cure for Discontent

A

Do you suppose that you alone have had this experience? Are
you surprised, as if it were a novelty, that after such long travel
and so many changes of scene you have not been able to shake
off the gloom and heaviness of your mind? You need a change of
soul rather than a change of climate.[1] Though you may cross vast
spaces of sea, and though, as our Vergil[2] remarks,
Lands and cities are left astern,
your faults will follow you whithersoever you travel.
Socrates made the same remark to one who complained; he
said: “Why do you wonder that globe-trotting does not help you,
seeing that you always take yourself with you? The reason which
set you wandering is ever at your heels.” What pleasure is there
in seeing new lands? Or in surveying cities and spots of interest?
All your bustle is useless. Do you ask why such flight does not
help you? It is because you flee along with yourself. You must lay
aside the burdens of the mind; until you do this, no place will
satisfy you.
Reflect that your present behaviour is like that of the prophetess
whom Vergil describes:[3] she is excited and goaded into fury, and
contains within herself much inspiration that is not her own:

138 THE TAO OF SENECA | VOLUME 1
The priestess raves, if haply she may shake
The great god from her heart.
You wander hither and yon, to rid yourself of the burden that
rests upon you, though it becomes more troublesome by reason of
your very restlessness, just as in a ship the cargo when stationary
makes no trouble, but when it shifts to this side or that, it causes
the vessel to heel more quickly in the direction where it has
settled. Anything you do tells against you, and you hurt yourself
by your very unrest; for you are shaking up a sick man.
That trouble once removed, all change of scene will become
pleasant; though you may be driven to the uttermost ends of the
earth, in whatever corner of a savage land you may find yourself,
that place, however forbidding, will be to you a hospitable abode.
The person you are matters more than the place to which you go;
for that reason we should not make the mind a bondsman to any
one place. Live in this belief: “I am not born for any one corner
of the universe; this whole world is my country.”
If you saw this fact clearly, you would not be surprised at getting
no benefit from the fresh scenes to which you roam each time
through weariness of the old scenes. For the first would have
pleased you in each case, had you believed it wholly yours.[4] As
it is, however, you are not journeying; you are drifting and being
driven, only exchanging one place for another, although that
which you seek—to live well—is found everywhere.[5]
Can there be any spot so full of confusion as the Forum? Yet
you can live quietly even there, if necessary. Of course, if one
were allowed to make one’s own arrangements, I should flee far
from the very sight and neighbourhood of the Forum. For just as
pestilential places assail even the strongest constitution, so there
are some places which are also unwholesome for a healthy mind
which is not yet quite sound, though recovering from its ailment.

I disagree with those who strike out into the midst of the bil-
lows and, welcoming a stormy existence, wrestle daily in hardi-
hood of soul with life’s problems. The wise man will endure all

that, but will not choose it; he will prefer to be at peace rather
than at war. It helps little to have cast out your own faults if you
must quarrel with those of others.
Says one: “There were thirty tyrants surrounding Socrates, and
yet they could not break his spirit”; but what does it matter how
many masters a man has? “Slavery” has no plural; and he who

has scorned it is free—no matter amid how large a mob of over-
lords he stands.

It is time to stop, but not before I have paid duty. “The
knowledge of sin is the beginning of salvation.” This saying of
Epicurus[6] seems to me to be a noble one. For he who does not
know that he has sinned does not desire correction; you must
discover yourself in the wrong before you can reform yourself.
Some boast of their faults. Do you think that the man has any
thought of mending his ways who counts over his vices as if they
were virtues? Therefore, as far as possible, prove yourself guilty,
hunt up charges against yourself; play the part, first of accuser,
then of judge, last of intercessor. At times be harsh with yourself.
[7] Farewell.
Footnotes
1. Cf. Horace, Ep. i. 11, 27 caelum non animum mutant qui trans
mare currunt.
2. Aeneid, iii. 72.
3. Aeneid, vi. 78 f.
4. i.e., had you been able to say patria mea totus mundus est.
5. Cf. Horace, Ep. i. 11, 28—navibus atque Quadrigis petimus bene vivere;
quod petis, hic est.
6. Frag. 522 Usener.
7. i.e., refuse your own intercession.

LETTER 29

On the Critical Condition of Marcellinus

A

You have been inquiring about our friend Marcellinus and you
desire to know how he is getting along. He seldom comes to see
me, for no other reason than that he is afraid to hear the truth,
and at present he is removed from my danger of hearing it; for one
must not talk to a man unless he is willing to listen. That is why
it is often doubted whether Diogenes and the other Cynics, who
employed an undiscriminating freedom of speech and offered
advice to any who came in their way, ought to have pursued such
a plan.
For what if one should chide the deaf or those who are
speechless from birth or by illness? But you answer: “Why should
I spare words? They cost nothing. I cannot know whether I shall
help the man to whom I give advice; but I know well that I shall
help someone if I advise many. I must scatter this advice by the
handful.[1] It is impossible that one who tries often should not
sometime succeed.”
This very thing, my dear Lucilius, is, I believe, exactly what a
great-souled man ought not to do; his influence is weakened; it
has too little effect upon those whom it might have set right if
it had not grown so stale. The archer ought not to hit the mark
only sometimes; he ought to miss it only sometimes. That which
takes effect by chance is not an art. Now wisdom is an art; it
should have a definite aim, choosing only those who will make
progress, but withdrawing from those whom it has come to regard
as hopeless—yet not abandoning them too soon, and just when
the case is becoming hopeless trying drastic remedies.
As to our friend Marcellinus, I have not yet lost hope. He can
still be saved, but the helping hand must be offered soon. There
is indeed danger that he may pull his helper down; for there is
in him a native character of great vigour, though it is already
inclining to wickedness. Nevertheless I shall brave this danger
and be bold enough to show him his faults.
He will act in his usual way; he will have recourse to his wit—
the wit that can call forth smiles even from mourners. He will
turn the jest, first against himself, and then against me. He will
forestall every word which I am about to utter. He will quiz our
philosophic systems; he will accuse philosophers of accepting
doles, keeping mistresses, and indulging their appetites. He will
point out to me one philosopher who has been caught in adultery,
another who haunts the cafes, and another who appears at court.
He will bring to my notice Aristo, the philosopher of Marcus
Lepidus, who used to hold discussions in his carriage; for that
was the time which he had taken for editing his researches, so
that Scaurus said of him when asked to what school he belonged:
“At any rate, he isn’t one of the Walking Philosophers.” Julius
Graecinus, too, a man of distinction, when asked for an opinion
on the same point, replied: “I cannot tell you; for I don’t know
what he does when dismounted,” as if the query referred to a
chariot-gladiator.[2]
It is mountebanks of that sort, for whom it would be more
creditable to have left philosophy alone than to traffic in her,
whom Marcellinus will throw in my teeth. But I have decided to
put up with taunts; he may stir my laughter, but I perchance shall
stir him to tears; or, if he persist in his jokes, I shall rejoice, so to

142 THE TAO OF SENECA | VOLUME 1
speak, in the midst of sorrow, because he is blessed with such a
merry sort of lunacy. But that kind of merriment does not last
long. Observe such men, and you will note that within a short
space of time they laugh to excess and rage to excess.
It is my plan to approach him and to show him how much
greater was his worth when many thought it less. Even though I
shall not root out his faults, I shall put a check upon them; they
will not cease, but they will stop for a time; and perhaps they will
even cease, if they get the habit of stopping. This is a thing not to
be despised, since to men who are seriously stricken the blessing
of relief is a substitute for health.
So while I prepare myself to deal with Marcellinus, do you in
the meantime, who are able, and who understand whence and
whither you have made your way, and who for that reason have
an inkling of the distance yet to go, regulate your character, rouse
your courage, and stand firm in the face of things which have
terrified you. Do not count the number of those who inspire
fear in you. Would you not regard as foolish one who was afraid
of a multitude in a place where only one at a time could pass?
Just so, there are not many who have access to you to slay you,
though there are many who threaten you with death. Nature has
so ordered it that, as only one has given you life, so only one will
take it away.
If you had any shame, you would have let me off from paying
the last instalment. Still, I shall not be niggardly either, but shall
discharge my debts to the last penny and force upon you what
I still owe: “I have never wished to cater to the crowd; for what
I know, they do not approve, and what they approve, I do not
know.”[3]
“Who said this?” you ask, as if you were ignorant whom I am
pressing into service; it is Epicurus. But this same watchword
rings in your ears from every sect—Peripatetic, Academic, Stoic,
Cynic. For who that is pleased by virtue can please the crowd?
It takes trickery to win popular approval; and you must needs
make yourself like unto them; they will withhold their approval
if they do not recognise you as one of themselves. However, what

you think of yourself is much more to the point than what oth-
ers think of you. The favour of ignoble men can be won only by

ignoble means.
What benefit, then, will that vaunted philosophy confer, whose
praises we sing, and which, we are told, is to be preferred to every
art and every possession? Assuredly, it will make you prefer to
please yourself rather than the populace, it will make you weigh,
and not merely count, men’s judgments, it will make you live
without fear of gods or men, it will make you either overcome
evils or end them. Otherwise, if I see you applauded by popular
acclamation, if your entrance upon the scene is greeted by a
roar of cheering and clapping, marks of distinction meet only
for actors—if the whole state, even the women and children,
sing your praises, how can I help pitying you? For I know what
pathway leads to such popularity. Farewell.
Footnotes
1. The usual expression is plena manu spargere, “with full hand,” cf. Ep. cxx.
10. In the famous saying of Corinna to Pindar: “Sow with the hand and not
with the sack,” the idea is “sparingly,” and not, as here, “bountifully.”
2. The essedarius fought from a car. When his adversary forced him out of
the car, he was compelled to continue the fight on foot, like an unhorsed
knight.
3. Epicurus, Frag. 187 Usener.

LETTER 30

On Conquering the Conqueror

A

I have beheld Aufidius Bassus, that noble man, shattered in health
and wrestling with his years. But they already bear upon him so
heavily that he cannot be raised up; old age has settled down upon
him with great—yes, with its entire, weight. You know that his
body was always delicate and sapless. For a long time he has kept
it in hand, or, to speak more correctly, has kept it together; of a
sudden it has collapsed.
Just as in a ship that springs a leak, you can always stop the first
or the second fissure, but when many holes begin to open and let
in water, the gaping hull cannot be saved; similarly, in an old man’s
body, there is a certain limit up to which you can sustain and prop
its weakness. But when it comes to resemble a decrepit building,
when every joint begins to spread and while one is being repaired
another falls apart—then it is time for a man to look about him
and consider how he may get out.[1]
But the mind of our friend Bassus is active. Philosophy bestows
this boon upon us; it makes us joyful in the very sight of death,
strong and brave no matter in what state the body may be, cheerful
and never failing though the body fail us. A great pilot can sail even
when his canvas is rent; if his ship be dismantled, he can yet put
Artwork opposite by Nimit Malavia

146 THE TAO OF SENECA | VOLUME 1
in trim what remains of her hull and hold her to her course. This
is what our friend Bassus is doing; and he contemplates his own
end with the courage and countenance which you would regard
as undue indifference in a man who so contemplated another’s.
This is a great accomplishment, Lucilius, and one which needs
long practice to learn—to depart calmly when the inevitable hour
arrives. Other kinds of death contain an ingredient of hope: a
disease comes to an end; a fire is quenched; falling houses have
set down in safety those whom they seemed certain to crush; the
sea has cast ashore unharmed those whom it had engulfed, by
the same force through which it drew them down; the soldier
has drawn back his sword from the very neck of his doomed foe.
But those whom old age is leading away to death have nothing to
hope for; old age alone grants no reprieve. No ending, to be sure,
is more painless; but there is none more lingering.
Our friend Bassus seemed to me to be attending his own funeral,
and laying out his own body for burial, and living almost as if he
had survived his own death, and bearing with wise resignation his
grief at his own departure. For he talks freely about death, trying
hard to persuade us that if this process contains any element of
discomfort or of fear, it is the fault of the dying person, and not
of death itself; also, that there is no more inconvenience at the
actual moment than there is after it is over.
“And it is just as insane,” he adds, “for a man to fear what will not
happen to him, as to fear what he will not feel if it does happen.”
Or does anyone imagine it to be possible that the agency by which
feeling is removed can be itself felt? “Therefore,” says Bassus, “death
stands so far beyond all evil that it is beyond all fear of evils.”
I know that all this has often been said and should be often
repeated; but neither when I read them were such precepts so
effective with me, nor when I heard them from the lips of those
who were at a safe distance from the fear of the things which they
declared were not to be feared. But this old man had the greatest
weight with me when he discussed death and death was near.
For I must tell you what I myself think: I hold that one is braver
at the very moment of death than when one is approaching death.
For death, when it stands near us, gives even to inexperienced men
the courage not to seek to avoid the inevitable. So the gladiator,
who throughout the fight has been no matter how faint-hearted,
offers his throat to his opponent and directs the wavering blade
to the vital spot.[2] But an end that is near at hand, and is bound
to come, calls for tenacious courage of soul; this is a rarer thing,
and none but the wise man can manifest it.
Accordingly, I listened to Bassus with the deepest pleasure; he
was casting his vote concerning death and pointing out what sort
of a thing it is when it is observed, so to speak, nearer at hand. I
suppose that a man would have your confidence in a larger degree,
and would have more weight with you, if he had come back to life
and should declare from experience that there is no evil in death;
and so, regarding the approach of death, those will tell you best
what disquiet it brings who have stood in its path, who have seen
it coming and have welcomed it.
Bassus may be included among these men; and he had no wish
to deceive us. He says that it is as foolish to fear death as to fear old
age; for death follows old age precisely as old age follows youth.
He who does not wish to die cannot have wished to live. For life is
granted to us with the reservation that we shall die; to this end our
path leads. Therefore, how foolish it is to fear it, since men simply
await that which is sure, but fear only that which is uncertain!
Death has its fixed rule—equitable and unavoidable. Who can
complain when he is governed by terms which include everyone?
The chief part of equity, however, is equality.
But it is superfluous at the present time to plead Nature’s cause;
for she wishes our laws to be identical with her own; she but

148 THE TAO OF SENECA | VOLUME 1
resolves that which she has compounded, and compounds again
that which she has resolved.
Moreover, if it falls to the lot of any man to be set gently adrift
by old age—not suddenly torn from life, but withdrawn bit by bit,
oh, verily he should thank the gods, one and all, because, after
he has had his fill, he is removed to a rest which is ordained for
mankind, a rest that is welcome to the weary. You may observe
certain men who crave death even more earnestly than others
are wont to beg for life. And I do not know which men give us
greater courage—those who call for death, or those who meet
it cheerfully and tranquilly—for the first attitude is sometimes
inspired by madness and sudden anger, the second is the calm
which results from fixed judgment. Before now men have gone
to meet death in a fit of rage; but when death comes to meet him,
no one welcomes it cheerfully, except the man who has long since
composed himself for death.
I admit, therefore, that I have visited this dear friend of mine
more frequently on many pretexts, but with the purpose of
learning whether I should find him always the same, and whether
his mental strength was perhaps waning in company with his
bodily powers. But it was on the increase, just as the joy of the
charioteer is wont to show itself more clearly when he is on the
seventh round[3] of the course, and nears the prize.
Indeed, he often said, in accord with the counsels of Epicurus:[4]
“I hope, first of all, that there is no pain at the moment when a
man breathes his last; but if there is, one will find an element
of comfort in its very shortness. For no great pain lasts long.
And at all events, a man will find relief at the very time when
soul and body are being torn asunder, even though the process
be accompanied by excruciating pain, in the thought that after
this pain is over he can feel no more pain. I am sure, however,
that an old man’s soul is on his very lips, and that only a little
force is necessary to disengage it from the body. A fire which has
seized upon a substance that sustains it needs water to quench it,
or, sometimes, the destruction of the building itself; but the fire
which lacks sustaining fuel dies away of its own accord.”
I am glad to hear such words, my dear Lucilius, not as new to
me, but as leading me into the presence of an actual fact. And
what then? Have I not seen many men break the thread of life? I
have indeed seen such men; but those have more weight with me
who approach death without any loathing for life, letting death
in, so to speak, and not pulling it towards them.
Bassus kept saying: “It is due to our own fault that we feel this
torture, because we shrink from dying only when we believe that
our end is near at hand.” But who is not near death? It is ready
for us in all places and at all times. “Let us consider,” he went on
to say, “when some agency of death seems imminent, how much
nearer are other varieties of dying which are not feared by us.”
A man is threatened with death by an enemy, but this form
of death is anticipated by an attack of indigestion. And if we are
willing to examine critically the various causes of our fear, we shall
find that some exist, and others only seem to be. We do not fear
death; we fear the thought of death. For death itself is always the
same distance from us; wherefore, if it is to be feared at all, it is to
be feared always. For what season of our life is exempt from death?
But what I really ought to fear is that you will hate this long
letter worse than death itself; so I shall stop. Do you, however,
always think on death in order that you may never fear it. Farewell.
Footnotes
1. i.e., exeas e vita, “depart from life.”
2. The defeated gladiator is supposed to be on his back, his opponent standing
over him and about to deliver the final blow. As the blade wavers at the
throat, searching for the jugular vein, the victim directs the point.
3. i.e., when on the home stretch.
4. Frag. 503 Usener.

LETTER 31
On Siren Songs
A

Now I recognize my Lucilius! He is beginning to reveal the char-
acter of which he gave promise. Follow up the impulse which

prompted you to make for all that is best, treading under your feet
that which is approved by the crowd. I would not have you greater
or better than you planned; for in your case the mere foundations
have covered a large extent of ground; only finish all that you have
laid out, and take in hand the plans which you have had in mind.
In short, you will be a wise man, if you stop up your ears; nor
is it enough to close them with wax; you need a denser stopple
than that which they say Ulysses used for his comrades. The song
which he feared was alluring, but came not from every side; the
song, however, which you have to fear, echoes round you not
from a single headland, but from every quarter of the world. Sail,
therefore, not past one region which you mistrust because of its
treacherous delights, but past every city. Be deaf to those who love
you most of all; they pray for bad things with good intentions.
And, if you would be happy, entreat the gods that none of their
fond desires for you may be brought to pass.
What they wish to have heaped upon you are not really good
things; there is only one good, the cause and the support of a
happy life—trust in oneself. But this cannot be attained, unless
one has learned to despise toil and to reckon it among the things
which are neither good nor bad. For it is not possible that a single
thing should be bad at one time and good at another, at times light
and to be endured, and at times a cause of dread.
Work is not a good.[1] Then what is a good? I say, the scorning
of work. That is why I should rebuke men who toil to no purpose.
But when, on the other hand, a man is struggling towards
honourable things, in proportion as he applies himself more and
more, and allows himself less and less to be beaten or to halt,[2]
I shall recommend his conduct and shout my encouragement,
saying: “By so much you are better! Rise, draw a fresh breath, and
surmount that hill, if possible, at a single spurt!”
Work is the sustenance of noble minds. There is, then, no
reason why, in accordance with that old vow of your parents,
you should pick and choose what fortune you wish should fall to
your lot, or what you should pray for; besides, it is base for a man
who has already travelled the whole round of highest honours to
be still importuning the gods. What need is there of vows? Make
yourself happy through your own efforts; you can do this, if once
you comprehend that whatever is blended with virtue is good,
and that whatever is joined to vice is bad. Just as nothing gleams
if it has no light blended with it, and nothing is black unless it
contains darkness or draws to itself something of dimness, and as
nothing is hot without the aid of fire, and nothing cold without
air; so it is the association of virtue and vice that makes things
honourable or base.
What then is good? The knowledge of things. What is evil?
The lack of knowledge of things. Your wise man, who is also a
craftsman, will reject or choose in each case as it suits the occasion;
but he does not fear that which he rejects, nor does he admire
that which he chooses, if only he has a stout and unconquerable
soul. I forbid you to be cast down or depressed. It is not enough
if you do not shrink from work; ask for it.

152 THE TAO OF SENECA | VOLUME 1
“But,” you say, “is not trifling and superfluous work, and work
that has been inspired by ignoble causes, a bad sort of work?” No;
no more than that which is expended upon noble endeavours,
since the very quality that endures toil and rouses itself to hard
and uphill effort, is of the spirit, which says: “Why do you grow
slack? It is not the part of a man to fear sweat.”
And besides this, in order that virtue may be perfect, there
should be an even temperament and a scheme of life that is
consistent with itself throughout; and this result cannot be
attained without knowledge of things, and without the art[3] which
enables us to understand things human and things divine. That
is the greatest good. If you seize this good, you begin to be the
associate of the gods, and not their suppliant.
“But how,” you ask, “does one attain that goal?” You do not need
to cross the Pennine or Graian[4] hills, or traverse the Candavian[5]
waste, or face the Syrtes,[6] or Scylla, or Charybdis, although you
have travelled through all these places for the bribe of a petty
governorship; the journey for which nature has equipped you is
safe and pleasant. She has given you such gifts that you may, if
you do not prove false to them, rise level with God.
Your money, however, will not place you on a level with God;
for God has no property. Your bordered robe[7] will not do this; for
God is not clad in raiment; nor will your reputation, nor a display
of self, nor a knowledge of your name wide-spread throughout
the world; for no one has knowledge of God; many even hold
him in low esteem, and do not suffer for so doing. The throng of
slaves which carries your litter along the city streets and in foreign
places will not help you; for this God of whom I speak, though
the highest and most powerful of beings, carries all things on his
own shoulders. Neither can beauty or strength make you blessed,
for none of these qualities can withstand old age.
What we have to seek for, then, is that which does not each
day pass more and more under the control of some power which
cannot be withstood.[8] And what is this? It is the soul—but the
soul that is upright, good, and great. What else could you call such
a soul than a god dwelling as a guest in a human body? A soul
like this may descend into a Roman knight just as well as into a

freedman’s son or a slave. For what is a Roman knight, or a freed-
men’s son, or a slave? They are mere titles, born of ambition or of

wrong. One may leap to heaven from the very slums. Only rise
And mould thyself to kinship with thy God.[9]
This moulding will not be done in gold or silver; an image that is
to be in the likeness of God cannot be fashioned of such materials;
remember that the gods, when they were kind unto men,[10] were
moulded in clay. Farewell.
Footnotes
1. The argument is that work is not, in itself, a good; if it were, it would
not be praiseworthy at one time and to be deprecated at another. It
belongs, therefore, to the class of things which the Stoics call ἀδιάφορα,
indifferentia, res mediae; cf. Cicero, de Fin. iii. 16.
2. Literally, “come to the end of his furrow.”
3. i.e., philosophy.
4. The Great St. Bernard and Little St. Bernard routes over the Alps.
5. A mountain in Illyria, over which the Via Egnatia ran.
6. Dangerous quick-sands along the north coast of Africa.
7. The toga praetexta, badge of the official position of Lucilius.
8. For example, Time or Chance.
9. Vergil, Aeneid, viii. 364 f.
10. In the Golden Age, described in Ep. xc., when men were nearest to nature
and “fresh from the gods.”

LETTER 32
On Progress
A

I have been asking about you, and inquiring of everyone who
comes from your part of the country, what you are doing, and
where you are spending your time, and with whom. You cannot
deceive me; for I am with you. Live just as if I were sure to get
news of your doings, nay, as if I were sure to behold them. And if
you wonder what particularly pleases me that I hear concerning
you, it is that I hear nothing, that most of those whom I ask do
not know what you are doing.
This is sound practice—to refrain from associating with men of
different stamp and different aims. And I am indeed confident that
you cannot be warped, that you will stick to your purpose, even
though the crowd may surround and seek to distract you. What,
then, is on my mind? I am not afraid lest they work a change in
you; but I am afraid lest they may hinder your progress. And much
harm is done even by one who holds you back, especially since
life is so short; and we make it still shorter by our unsteadiness,
by making ever fresh beginnings at life, now one and immediately
another. We break up life into little bits, and fritter it away.
Hasten ahead, then, dearest Lucilius, and reflect how greatly
you would quicken your speed if an enemy were at your back, or
if you suspected the cavalry were approaching and pressing hard
upon your steps as you fled. It is true; the enemy is indeed pressing
upon you; you should therefore increase your speed and escape
away and reach a safe position, remembering continually what a
noble thing it is to round out your life before death comes, and
then await in peace the remaining portion of your time, claiming[1]
nothing for yourself, since you are in possession of the happy life;
for such a life is not made happier for being longer.
O when shall you see the time when you shall know that time
means nothing to you, when you shall be peaceful and calm,
careless of the morrow, because you are enjoying your life to the
full?
Would you know what makes men greedy for the future? It is
because no one has yet found himself. Your parents, to be sure,
asked other blessings for you; but I myself pray rather that you
may despise all those things which your parents wished for you in
abundance. Their prayers plunder many another person, simply
that you may be enriched. Whatever they make over to you must
be removed from someone else.
I pray that you may get such control over yourself that your
mind, now shaken by wandering thoughts, may at last come to
rest and be steadfast, that it may be content with itself and, having
attained an understanding of what things are truly good—and
they are in our possession as soon as we have this knowledge—
that it may have no need of added years. He has at length passed
beyond all necessities—he has won his honourable discharge and
is free—who still lives after his life has been completed. Farewell.
Footnotes
1. The text seems to be corrupt. Hense thinks that expectare is to be supplied
with nihil sibi—“To expect nothing for oneself ”; but the use of the verb
in two meanings would be harsh. The thought seems to be “asking for no
added years”; and one suspects that the loss of a word like adrogantem
before nihil.

LETTER 33

On the Futility of Learning Maxims

A

You wish me to close these letters also, as I closed my former let-
ters, with certain utterances taken from the chiefs of our school.

But they did not interest themselves in choice extracts; the whole
texture of their work is full of strength. There is unevenness, you
know, when some objects rise conspicuous above others. A single
tree is not remarkable if the whole forest rises to the same height.
Poetry is crammed with utterances of this sort, and so is
history. For this reason I would not have you think that these
utterances belong to Epicurus. they are common property and are
emphatically our own.[1] They are, however, more noteworthy in
Epicurus, because they appear at infrequent intervals and when
you do not expect them, and because it is surprising that brave
words should be spoken at any time by a man who made a practice
of being effeminate. For that is what most persons maintain.
In my own opinion, however, Epicurus is really a brave man,
even though he did wear long sleeves.[2] Fortitude, energy, and
readiness for battle are to be found among the Persians,[3] just as
much as among men who have girded themselves up high.
Therefore, you need not call upon me for extracts and
quotations; such thoughts as one may extract here and there in
the works of other philosophers run through the whole body of
our writings. Hence we have no “show-window goods,” nor do we
deceive the purchaser in such a way that, if he enters our shop, he
will find nothing except that which is displayed in the window.
We allow the purchasers themselves to get their samples from
anywhere they please.
Suppose we should desire to sort out each separate motto
from the general stock; to whom shall we credit them? To Zeno,
Cleanthes, Chrysippus, Panaetius, or Posidonius? We Stoics are
not subjects of a despot: each of us lays claim to his own freedom.
With them,[4] on the other hand, whatever Hermarchus says or
Metrodorus, is ascribed to one source. In that brotherhood,
everything that any man utters is spoken under the leadership
and commanding authority[5] of one alone. We cannot, I maintain,
no matter how we try, pick out anything from so great a multitude
of things equally good.
Only the poor man counts his flock.[6]
Wherever you direct your gaze, you will meet with something
that might stand out from the rest, if the context in which you
read it were not equally notable.
For this reason, give over hoping that you can skim, by means
of epitomes, the wisdom of distinguished men. Look into their
wisdom as a whole; study it as a whole. They are working out a
plan and weaving together, line upon line, a masterpiece, from
which nothing can be taken away without injury to the whole.
Examine the separate parts, if you like, provided you examine
them as parts of the man himself. She is not a beautiful woman
whose ankle or arm is praised, but she whose general appearance
makes you forget to admire her single attributes.
If you insist, however, I shall not be niggardly with you, but
lavish; for there is a huge multitude of these passages; they are
scattered about in profusion—they do not need to be gathered
together, but merely to be picked up. They do not drip forth

158 THE TAO OF SENECA | VOLUME 1
occasionally; they flow continuously. They are unbroken and are
closely connected. Doubtless they would be of much benefit to
those who are still novices and worshipping outside the shrine;
for single maxims sink in more easily when they are marked off
and bounded like a line of verse.
That is why we give to children a proverb, or that which the
Greeks call Chria,

[7] to be learned by heart; that sort of thing can
be comprehended by the young mind, which cannot as yet hold
more. For a man, however, whose progress is definite, to chase
after choice extracts and to prop his weakness by the best known

and the briefest sayings and to depend upon his memory, is dis-
graceful; it is time for him to lean on himself. He should make

such maxims and not memorize them. For it is disgraceful even

for an old man, or one who has sighted old age, to have a note-
book knowledge. “This is what Zeno said.” But what have you

yourself said? “This is the opinion of Cleanthes.” But what is your
own opinion? How long shall you march under another man’s
orders? Take command, and utter some word which posterity will
remember. Put forth something from your own stock.
For this reason I hold that there is nothing of eminence in
all such men as these, who never create anything themselves,
but always lurk in the shadow of others, playing the rôle of
interpreters, never daring to put once into practice what they have
been so long in learning. They have exercised their memories on
other men’s material. But it is one thing to remember, another to
know. Remembering is merely safeguarding something entrusted
to the memory; knowing, however, means making everything
your own; it means not depending upon the copy and not all the
time glancing back at the master.
“Thus said Zeno, thus said Cleanthes, indeed!” Let there be a
difference between yourself and your book! How long shall you
be a learner? From now on be a teacher as well! “But why,” one
asks,[8] “should I have to continue hearing lectures on what I can
read?” “The living voice,” one replies, “is a great help.” Perhaps,
but not the voice which merely makes itself the mouthpiece of
another’s words, and only performs the duty of a reporter.
Consider this fact also. Those who have never attained their
mental independence begin, in the first place, by following the
leader in cases where everyone has deserted the leader; then, in
the second place, they follow him in matters where the truth is still
being investigated. However, the truth will never be discovered
if we rest contented with discoveries already made. Besides, he
who follows another not only discovers nothing but is not even
investigating.
What then? Shall I not follow in the footsteps of my
predecessors? I shall indeed use the old road, but if I find one
that makes a shorter cut and is smoother to travel, I shall open
the new road. Men who have made these discoveries before us
are not our masters, but our guides. Truth lies open for all; it has
not yet been monopolized. And there is plenty of it left even for
posterity to discover. Farewell.
Footnotes
1. Stoic as well as Epicurean.
2. Contrasted with alte cinctos. The sleeveless and “girt-up” tunic is the sign of
energy; cf. Horace, Sat. i. 5. 5, and Suetonius, Caligula, 52: the effeminate
Caligula would “appear in public with a long-sleeved tunic and bracelets.”
3. Who wore sleeves.
4. i.e., the Epicureans.
5. For the phrase ductu et auspiciis see Plautus, Amph. i. 1. 41 ut gesserit rem
publicam ductu imperio auspicio suo; and Horace, Od. i. 7. 27 Teucro duce et
auspice Teucro. The original significance of the phrase refers to the right of
the commander-in-chief to take the auspices.
6. Ovid, Metamorphosis, xiii. 824.
7. Either “maxims” or “outlines,” “themes.” For a discussion of them see
Quintilian, Inst. Orat. i. 9. 3 ff.
8. The objector is the assumed auditor. The answer to the objection gives
the usual view as to the power of the living voice; to this Seneca assents,
provided that the voice has a message of its own.

LETTER 34
On a Promising Pupil

A

I grow in spirit and leap for joy and shake off my years and
my blood runs warm again, whenever I understand, from your
actions and your letters, how far you have outdone yourself; for
as to the ordinary man, you left him in the rear long ago. If the
farmer is pleased when his tree develops so that it bears fruit, if
the shepherd takes pleasure in the increase of his flocks, if every
man regards his pupil as though he discerned in him his own early
manhood—what, then, do you think are the feelings of those who
have trained a mind and moulded a young idea, when they see it
suddenly grown to maturity?
I claim you for myself; you are my handiwork. When I saw
your abilities, I laid my hand upon you,[1] I exhorted you, I applied
the goad and did not permit you to march lazily, but roused you
continually. And now I do the same; but by this time I am cheering
on one who is in the race and so in turn cheers me on.
“What else do you want of me, then?” you ask; “the will is
still mine.” Well, the will in this case is almost everything, and
not merely the half, as in the proverb “A task once begun is half
done.” It is more than half, for the matter of which we speak is

determined by the soul.[2] Hence it is that the larger part of good-
ness is the will to become good. You know what I mean by a good
man? One who is complete, finished—whom no constraint or
need can render bad.
I see such a person in you, if only you go steadily on and
bend to your task, and see to it that all your actions and words
harmonize and correspond with each other and are stamped in
the same mould. If a man’s acts are out of harmony, his soul is
crooked. Farewell.
Footnotes
1. A reference to the act (iniectio) by which a Roman took possession of
a thing belonging to him, e.g., a runaway slave—without a decision of
the court
2. i.e., the proverb may apply to tasks which a man performs with his hands,
but it is an understatement when applied to the tasks of the soul.

LETTER 35

On the Friendship of Kindred Minds

A

When I urge you so strongly to your studies, it is my own interest
which I am consulting; I want your friendship, and it cannot fall
to my lot unless you proceed, as you have begun, with the task
of developing yourself. For now, although you love me, you are
not yet my friend. “But,” you reply, “are these words of different
meaning?” Nay, more, they are totally unlike in meaning.[1] A
friend loves you, of course; but one who loves you is not in every
case your friend. Friendship, accordingly, is always helpful, but
love sometimes even does harm. Try to perfect yourself, if for no
other reason, in order that you may learn how to love.
Hasten, therefore, in order that, while thus perfecting yourself
for my benefit, you may not have learned perfection for the
benefit of another. To be sure, I am already deriving some profit
by imagining that we two shall be of one mind, and that whatever
portion of my strength has yielded to age will return to me from
your strength, although there is not so very much difference in
our ages.
But yet I wish to rejoice in the accomplished fact. We feel a
joy over those whom we love, even when separated from them,
but such a joy is light and fleeting; the sight of a man, and his
presence, and communion with him, afford something of living
pleasure; this is true, at any rate, if one not only sees the man
one desires, but the sort of man one desires. Give yourself to
me, therefore, as a gift of great price, and, that you may strive
the more, reflect that you yourself are mortal, and that I am old.
Hasten to find me, but hasten to find yourself first. Make
progress, and, before all else, endeavour to be consistent with
yourself. And when you would find out whether you have
accomplished anything, consider whether you desire the same
things today that you desired yesterday. A shifting of the will
indicates that the mind is at sea, heading in various directions,
according to the course of the wind. But that which is settled
and solid does not wander from its place. This is the blessed lot
of the completely wise man, and also, to a certain extent, of him
who is progressing and has made some headway. Now what is the
difference between these two classes of men? The one is in motion,
to be sure, but does not change its position; it merely tosses up
and down where it is; the other is not in motion at all. Farewell.
Footnotes
1. The question of Lucilius represents the popular view, which regards love
as including friendship. But according to Seneca it is only the perfect love,
from which all selfishness has been removed, that becomes identical with
friendship.

LETTER 36

On the Value of Retirement

A

Encourage your friend to despise stout-heartedly those who
upbraid him because he has sought the shade of retirement and
has abdicated his career of honours, and, though he might have
attained more, has preferred tranquillity to them all. Let him
prove daily to these detractors how wisely he has looked out for
his own interests. Those whom men envy will continue to march
past him; some will be pushed out of the ranks, and others will
fall. Prosperity is a turbulent thing; it torments itself. It stirs the
brain in more ways than one, goading men on to various aims—
some to power, and others to high living. Some it puffs up; others
it slackens and wholly enervates.
“But,” the retort comes, “so-and-so carries his prosperity well.”
Yes; just as he carries his liquor. So you need not let this class of
men persuade you that one who is besieged by the crowd is happy;
they run to him as crowds rush for a pool of water, rendering it
muddy while they drain it. But you say: “Men call our friend a
trifler and a sluggard.” There are men, you know, whose speech is
awry, who use the contrary[1] terms. They called him happy; what
of it? Was he happy?
Even the fact that to certain persons he seems a man of a very
rough and gloomy cast of mind, does not trouble me. Aristo[2]
used to say that he preferred a youth of stern disposition to one
who was a jolly fellow and agreeable to the crowd. “For,” he added,
“wine which, when new, seemed harsh and sour, becomes good
wine; but that which tasted well at the vintage cannot stand age.”
So let them call him stern and a foe to his own advancement, it
is just this sternness that will go well when it is aged, provided
only that he continues to cherish virtue and to absorb thoroughly
the studies which make for culture—not those with which it is
sufficient for a man to sprinkle himself, but those in which the
mind should be steeped.
Now is the time to learn. “What? Is there any time when a
man should not learn?” By no means; but just as it is creditable
for every age to study, so it is not creditable for every age to be
instructed. An old man learning his A B C is a disgraceful and
absurd object; the young man must store up, the old man must
use. You will therefore be doing a thing most helpful to yourself
if you make this friend of yours as good a man as possible; those
kindnesses, they tell us, are to be both sought for and bestowed,
which benefit the giver no less than the receiver; and they are
unquestionably the best kind.
Finally, he has no longer any freedom in the matter; he has
pledged his word. And it is less disgraceful to compound with
a creditor than to compound with a promising future. To pay
his debt of money, the business man must have a prosperous
voyage, the farmer must have fruitful fields and kindly weather;
but the debt which your friend owes can be completely paid by
mere goodwill.
Fortune has no jurisdiction over character. Let him so regulate
his character that in perfect peace he may bring to perfection that
spirit within him which feels neither loss nor gain, but remains in
the same attitude, no matter how things fall out. A spirit like this,
if it is heaped with worldly goods, rises superior to its wealth; if,

166 THE TAO OF SENECA | VOLUME 1
on the other hand, chance has stripped him of a part of his wealth,
or even all, it is not impaired.
If your friend had been born in Parthia, he would have begun,
when a child, to bend the bow; if in Germany, he would forthwith
have been brandishing his slender spear; if he had been born in
the days of our forefathers, he would have learned to ride a horse
and smite his enemy hand to hand. These are the occupations
which the system of each race recommends to the individual—
yes, prescribes for him.
To what, then, shall this friend[3] of yours devote his attention? I
say, let him learn that which is helpful against all weapons, against
every kind of foe—contempt of death; because no one doubts that
death has in it something that inspires terror, so that it shocks
even our souls, which nature has so moulded that they love their
own existence; for otherwise[4] there would be no need to prepare
ourselves, and to whet our courage, to face that towards which
we should move with a sort of voluntary instinct, precisely as all
men tend to preserve their existence.
No man learns a thing in order that, if necessity arises, he may
lie down with composure upon a bed of roses; but he steels his
courage to this end, that he may not surrender his plighted faith to
torture, and that, if need be, he may some day stay out his watch
in the trenches, even though wounded, without even leaning on
his spear; because sleep is likely to creep over men who support
themselves by any prop whatsoever.
In death there is nothing harmful; for there must exist
something to which it is harmful.[5]
And yet, if you are possessed by so great a craving for a longer
life, reflect that none of the objects which vanish from our gaze
and are re-absorbed into the world of things, from which they
have come forth and are soon to come forth again, is annihilated;
they merely end their course and do not perish. And death, which
we fear and shrink from, merely interrupts life, but does not steal
it away; the time will return when we shall be restored to the light
of day; and many men would object to this, were they not brought
back in forgetfulness of the past.
But I mean to show you later,[6] with more care, that everything
which seems to perish merely changes. Since you are destined to
return, you ought to depart with a tranquil mind. Mark how the
round of the universe repeats its course; you will see that no star
in our firmament is extinguished, but that they all set and rise in
alternation. Summer has gone, but another year will bring it again;
winter lies low, but will be restored by its own proper months;
night has overwhelmed the sun, but day will soon rout the night
again. The wandering stars retrace their former courses; a part of
the sky is rising unceasingly, and a part is sinking.
One word more, and then I shall stop; infants, and boys, and
those who have gone mad, have no fear of death, and it is most
shameful if reason cannot afford us that peace of mind to which
they have been brought by their folly. Farewell.
Footnotes
1. i.e., they are no more correct now, when they called him a trifler, than they
were before, when they called him happy.
2. Aristo of Chios, Frag. 388 von Armin.
3. As a Roman, living in an age when philosophy was recommended and
prescribed.
4. i.e., if death inspired no terror.
5. And since after death we do not exist, death cannot be harmful to us.
Seneca has in mind the argument of Epicurus (Diogenes Laertius,
x. 124-5): “Therefore the most dread-inspiring of all evils, death, is nothing
to us; for when we exist; death is not present in us, and when death is
present, then we do not exist. Therefore it does not concern either the
living or the dead; for to the living it has no existence, and the dead do
not themselves exist.” Lucretius uses this argument, concluding it with (iii.
830): Nil igitur mors est ad nos neque pertinet hilum.
6. For example, in Ep. lxxvii.

LETTER 37
On Allegiance to Virtue

A

You have promised to be a good man; you have enlisted under
oath; that is the strongest chain which will hold you to a sound
understanding. Any man will be but mocking you, if he declares
that this is an effeminate and easy kind of soldiering. I will not
have you deceived. The word of this most honourable compact
are the same as the words of that most disgraceful one, to wit:[1]
“Through burning, imprisonment, or death by the sword.”
From the men who hire out their strength for the arena, who
eat and drink what they must pay for with their blood, security
is taken that they will endure such trials even though they be
unwilling; from you, that you will endure them willingly and with
alacrity. The gladiator may lower his weapon and test the pity of
the people;[2] but you will neither lower your weapon nor beg for
life. You must die erect and unyielding. Moreover, what profit is
it to gain a few days or a few years? There is no discharge for us
from the moment we are born.
“Then how can I free myself?” you ask. You cannot escape
necessities, but you can overcome them
By force a way is made.[3]
And this way will be afforded you by philosophy. Betake yourself
therefore to philosophy if you would be safe, untroubled, happy,
in fine, if you wish to be—and that is most important—free. There
is no other way to attain this end.
Folly[4] is low, abject, mean, slavish, and exposed to many of the
cruellest passions. These passions, which are heavy taskmasters,
sometimes ruling by turns, and sometimes together, can be
banished from you by wisdom, which is the only real freedom.
There is but one path leading thither, and it is a straight path; you
will not go astray. Proceed with steady step, and if you would have
all things under your control, put yourself under the control of
reason; if reason becomes your ruler, you will become ruler over
many. You will learn from her what you should undertake, and
how it should be done; you will not blunder into things.
You can show me no man who knows how he began to crave that
which he craves. He has not been led to that pass by forethought;
he has been driven to it by impulse. Fortune attacks us as often as
we attack Fortune. It is disgraceful, instead of proceeding ahead,
to be carried along, and then suddenly, amid the whirlpool of
events, to ask in a dazed way: “How did I get into this condition?”
Farewell.
Footnotes
1. He refers to the famous oath which the gladiator took when he hired
himself to the fighting-master; uri, vinciri, verberari, ferroque necari patior;
cf. Petronius, Sat. 117. The oath is abbreviated in the text, probably by
Seneca himself, who paraphrases it in Ep. lxxi. 23.
2. Awaiting the signal of “thumbs up” or “thumbs down.” Cf. Juvenal, iii. 36
verso pollice, vulgus Quem iubet occidunt populariter.
3. Vergil, Aeneid, ii. 494.
4. In the language of Stoicism, ἀμαθία, stultitia, “folly,” is the antithesis of
σοφία, sapientia, “wisdom.”

LETTER 38
On Quiet Conversation

A

You are right when you urge that we increase our mutual traffic

in letters. But the greatest benefit is to be derived from conversa-
tion, because it creeps by degrees into the soul. Lectures prepared

beforehand and spouted in the presence of a throng have in them
more noise but less intimacy. Philosophy is good advice; and no
one can give advice at the top of his lungs. Of course we must
sometimes also make use of these harangues, if I may so call them,
when a doubting member needs to be spurred on; but when the
aim is to make a man learn and not merely to make him wish to

learn, we must have recourse to the low-toned words of conversa-
tion. They enter more easily, and stick in the memory; for we do

not need many words, but, rather, effective words.
Words should be scattered like seed; no matter how small the
seed may be, if it has once found favourable ground, it unfolds

its strength and from an insignificant thing spreads to its great-
est growth. Reason grows in the same way; it is not large to the

outward view, but increases as it does its work. Few words are
spoken; but if the mind has truly caught them, they come into
their strength and spring up. Yes, precepts and seeds have the
same quality; they produce much, and yet they are slight things.
Only, as I said, let a favourable mind receive and assimilate them.
Then of itself the mind also will produce bounteously in its turn,
giving back more than it has received. Farewell.

THOUGHTS FROM MODERN STOICS

“Good”: An Essay by Jocko Willink
Source: Tools of Titans by Tim Ferriss

Background from Tim: Jocko Willink (FB/TW: @jockowillink;

jockopodcast.com) is one of the scariest human beings imagin-
able. He is a lean 230 pounds. He is a Brazilian jiu-jitsu black belt

who used to tap out 20 Navy SEALs per workout. He is a legend
in the special operations world, and his eyes look through you
more than at you. His interview with me was the first interview
he ever did, and it took the Internet by storm.
Jocko spent 20 years in the U.S. Navy and commanded SEAL
Team Three’s Task Unit Bruiser, the most highly decorated special
operations unit from the Iraq war. Upon returning to the United
States, Jocko served as the officer-in-charge of training for all West
Coast SEAL Teams, designing and implementing some of the
most challenging and realistic combat training in the world. After

retiring from the Navy, he co-founded Echelon Front, a leader-
ship and management consulting company, and co-authored the

#1 New York Times bestseller Extreme Ownership: How U.S. Navy
SEALs Lead and Win.

He now discusses war, leadership, business and life in his top-
rated podcast, Jocko Podcast. He is an avid surfer, a husband, and

the father of four “highly motivated” children.

THOUGHTS FROM MODERN STOICS | JOCKO WILLINK 173

ENTER JOCKO
How do I deal with setbacks, failures, delays, defeat, or other
disasters? I actually have a fairly simple way of dealing with these
situations. There is one word to deal with all those situations, and
that is: “good.”
This is something that one of my direct subordinates, one of
the guys who worked for me, a guy who became one of my best
friends, pointed out. He would call me up or pull me aside with
some major problem or some issue that was going on, and he’d
say, “Boss, we got this, that, or the other thing going wrong,” and
I would look at him and I’d say, “Good.”
And finally, one day, he was telling me about some situation
that was going off the rails, and as soon as he got done explaining
it to me, he said, “I already know what you’re going to say.”
And I asked, “What am I going to say?”
He said, “You’re going to say: ‘Good.’”
He continued, “That’s what you always say. When something is
wrong or going bad, you just look at me and say, ‘Good.’”
And I said, “Well, I mean it. Because that is how I operate.” So
I explained to him that when things are going bad, there’s going
to be some good that will come from it.
➞ Oh, mission got cancelled? Good. We can focus on
another one.
➞ Didn’t get the new high-speed gear we wanted? Good. We
can keep it simple.
➞ Didn’t get promoted? Good. More time to get better.
➞ Didn’t get funded? Good. We own more of the company.
➞ Didn’t get the job you wanted? Good. Go out, gain more
experience, and build a better résumé.

174 THE TAO OF SENECA | VOLUME 1
➞ Got injured? Good. Needed a break from training.
➞ Got tapped out? Good. It’s better to tap out in training
than to tap out on the street.
➞ Got beat? Good. We learned.
➞ Unexpected problems? Good. We have the opportunity to
figure out a solution.
That’s it. When things are going bad, don’t get all bummed out,
don’t get startled, don’t get frustrated. No. Just look at the issue
and say: “Good.”
Now. I don’t mean to say something clichéd. I’m not trying to
sound like Mr. Smiley Positive Guy. That guy ignores the hard
truth. That guy thinks a positive attitude will solve problems.
It won’t. But neither will dwelling on the problem. No. Accept

reality, but focus on the solution. Take that issue, take that set-
back, take that problem, and turn it into something good. Go

forward. And, if you are part of a team, that attitude will spread
throughout.
Finally, to close this up: If you can say the word “good,” guess
what? It means you’re still alive. It means you’re still breathing.
And if you’re still breathing, that means you’ve still got some
fight left in you. So get up, dust off, reload, recalibrate, re-engage,
and go out on the attack.
And that, right there, is about as good as it gets.

LETTER 39
On Noble Aspirations

A

I shall indeed arrange for you, in careful order and narrow com-
pass, the notes which you request. But consider whether you may

not get more help from the customary method[1] than from that
which is now commonly called a “breviary,” though in the good
old days, when real Latin was spoken, it was called a “summary.”[2]
The former is more necessary to one who is learning a subject, the
latter to one who knows it. For the one teaches, the other stirs the
memory. But I shall give you abundant opportunity for both.[3] A
man like you should not ask me for this authority or that; he who
furnishes a voucher for his statements argues himself unknown.
I shall therefore write exactly what you wish, but I shall do it
in my own way; until then, you have many authors whose works
will presumably keep your ideas sufficiently in order. Pick up the
list of the philosophers; that very act will compel you to wake up,
when you see how many men have been working for your benefit.
You will desire eagerly to be one of them yourself, for this is the
most excellent quality that the noble soul has within itself, that it
can be roused to honourable things.
No man of exalted gifts is pleased with that which is low and
mean; the vision of great achievement summons him and uplifts
him.

176 THE TAO OF SENECA | VOLUME 1
Just as the flame springs straight into the air and cannot be
cabined or kept down any more than it can repose in quiet, so our
soul is always in motion, and the more ardent it is, the greater its
motion and activity. But happy is the man who has given it this
impulse toward better things! He will place himself beyond the
jurisdiction of chance; he will wisely control prosperity; he will
lessen adversity, and will despise what others hold in admiration.
It is the quality of a great soul to scorn great things and to
prefer that which is ordinary rather than that which is too great.
For the one condition is useful and life-giving; but the other does
harm just because it is excessive. Similarly, too rich a soil makes
the grain fall flat, branches break down under too heavy a load,
excessive productiveness does not bring fruit to ripeness. This
is the case with the soul also; for it is ruined by uncontrolled
prosperity, which is used not only to the detriment of others, but
also to the detriment of itself.
What enemy was ever so insolent to any opponent as are their
pleasures to certain men? The only excuse that we can allow for
the incontinence and mad lust of these men is the fact that they
suffer the evils which they have inflicted upon others. And they
are rightly harassed by this madness, because desire must have
unbounded space for its excursions, if it transgresses nature’s
mean. For this has its bounds, but waywardness and the acts that
spring from wilful lust are without boundaries.
Utility measures our needs; but by what standard can you check
the superfluous? It is for this reason that men sink themselves
in pleasures, and they cannot do without them when once they
have become accustomed to them, and for this reason they are
most wretched, because they have reached such a pass that what
was once superfluous to them has become indispensable. And
so they are the slaves of their pleasures instead of enjoying them;
they even love their own ills,[4]—and that is the worst ill of all!
Then it is that the height of unhappiness is reached, when men
are not only attracted, but even pleased, by shameful things, and
when there is no longer any room for a cure, now that those things
which once were vices have become habits. Farewell.
Footnotes
1. The regular method of studying philosophy was, as we infer from this
letter, a course of reading in the philosophers. Seneca deprecates the use of
the “cram” which is only a memory-help, as a substitute for reading, on the
ground that by its use one does not, in the first place, learn the subject, and,
in the second place and chiefly, that one loses the inspiration to be derived
by direct contact with great thinkers. The request of Lucilius for a cram
thus suggests the main topic of the letter, which is taken up in the second
paragraph.
2. i.e., the word breviarium, “abridgment,” “abstract,” has displaced the better
word summarium, “outline of chief points.”
3. i.e., to do the reading and to review it by means of the summary. The
reading will enable Lucilius to identify for himself the authors of the several
passages or doctrines.
4. i.e., their pleasures. These ills, by being cultivated, become vices.

LETTER 40
On the Proper Style for a
Philosopher’s Discourse

A

I thank you for writing to me so often; for you are revealing your
real self to me in the only way you can. I never receive a letter from
you without being in your company forthwith. If the pictures of
our absent friends are pleasing to us, though they only refresh the
memory and lighten our longing by a solace that is unreal and
unsubstantial, how much more pleasant is a letter, which brings
us real traces, real evidences, of an absent friend! For that which
is sweetest when we meet face to face is afforded by the impress
of a friend’s hand upon his letter—recognition.
You write me that you heard a lecture by the philosopher
Serapio,[1] when he landed at your present place of residence. “He
is wont,” you say, “to wrench up his words with a mighty rush,
and he does not let them flow forth one by one, but makes them
crowd and dash upon each other.[2] For the words come in such
quantity that a single voice is inadequate to utter them.” I do not
approve of this in a philosopher; his speech, like his life, should
be composed; and nothing that rushes headlong and is hurried
is well ordered. That is why, in Homer, the rapid style, which
sweeps down without a break like a snow-squall, is assigned to
the younger speaker; from the old man eloquence flows gently,
sweeter than honey.[3]
Therefore, mark my words; that forceful manner of speech,
rapid and copious, is more suited to a mountebank than to a man
who is discussing and teaching an important and serious subject.
But I object just as strongly that he should drip out his words as
that he should go at top speed; he should neither keep the ear

on the stretch, nor deafen it. For that poverty-stricken and thin-
spun style also makes the audience less attentive because they are

weary of its stammering slowness; nevertheless, the word which
has been long awaited sinks in more easily than the word which
flits past us on the wing. Finally, people speak of “handing down”
precepts to their pupils; but one is not “handing down” that which
eludes the grasp.
Besides, speech that deals with the truth should be unadorned
and plain. This popular style has nothing to do with the truth;
its aim is to impress the common herd, to ravish heedless ears by
its speed; it does not offer itself for discussion, but snatches itself
away from discussion. But how can that speech govern others
which cannot itself be governed? May I not also remark that all
speech which is employed for the purpose of healing our minds,
ought to sink into us? Remedies do not avail unless they remain
in the system.
Besides, this sort of speech contains a great deal of sheer
emptiness; it has more sound than power. My terrors should
be quieted, my irritations soothed, my illusions shaken off, my
indulgences checked, my greed rebuked. And which of these cures
can be brought about in a hurry? What physician can heal his
patient on a flying visit? May I add that such a jargon of confused
and ill-chosen words cannot afford pleasure, either?
No; but just as you are well satisfied, in the majority of cases, to
have seen through tricks which you did not think could possibly
be done,[4] so in the case of these word-gymnasts to have heard
them once is amply sufficient. For what can a man desire to learn

180 THE TAO OF SENECA | VOLUME 1
or to imitate in them? What is he to think of their souls, when
their speech is sent into the charge in utter disorder, and cannot
be kept in hand?
Just as, when you run down hill, you cannot stop at the point
where you had decided to stop, but your steps are carried along
by the momentum of your body and are borne beyond the place
where you wished to halt; so this speed of speech has no control
over itself, nor is it seemly for philosophy; since philosophy
should carefully place her words, not fling them out, and should
proceed step by step.
“What then?” you say; “should not philosophy sometimes take
a loftier tone?” Of course she should; but dignity of character
should be preserved, and this is stripped away by such violent and
excessive force. Let philosophy possess great forces, but kept well
under control; let her stream flow unceasingly, but never become
a torrent. And I should hardly allow even to an orator a rapidity of
speech like this, which cannot be called back, which goes lawlessly
ahead; for how could it be followed by jurors, who are often
inexperienced and untrained? Even when the orator is carried
away by his desire to show off his powers, or by uncontrollable
emotion, even then he should not quicken his pace and heap up
words to an extent greater than the ear can endure.
You will be acting rightly, therefore, if you do not regard those
men who seek how much they may say, rather than how they shall
say it, and if for yourself you choose, provided a choice must be
made, to speak as Publius Vinicius the stammerer does. When
Asellius was asked how Vinicius spoke, he replied: “Gradually”!
(It was a remark of Geminus Varius, by the way: “I don’t see how
you can call that man ‘eloquent’; why, he can’t get out three words
together.”) Why, then, should you not choose to speak as Vinicius
does?

Though of course some wag may cross your path, like the per-
son who said, when Vinicius was dragging out his words one

by one, as if he were dictating and not speaking. “Say, haven’t
you anything to say?” And yet that were the better choice, for
the rapidity of Quintus Haterius, the most famous orator of his
age, is, in my opinion, to be avoided by a man of sense. Haterius
never hesitated, never paused; he made only one start, and only
one stop.
However, I suppose that certain styles of speech are more or
less suitable to nations also; in a Greek you can put up with the
unrestrained style, but we Romans, even when writing, have
become accustomed to separate our words.[5] And our compatriot
Cicero, with whom Roman oratory sprang into prominence, was
also a slow pacer.[6] The Roman language is more inclined to take
stock of itself, to weigh, and to offer something worth weighing.
Fabianius, a man noteworthy because of his life, his knowledge,
and, less important than either of these, his eloquence also, used
to discuss a subject with dispatch rather than with haste; hence
you might call it ease rather than speed. I approve this quality in
the wise man; but I do not demand it; only let his speech proceed
unhampered, though I prefer that it should be deliberately uttered
rather than spouted.
However, I have this further reason for frightening you away

from the latter malady, namely, that you could only be success-
ful in practicing this style by losing your sense of modesty; you

would have to rub all shame from your countenance,[7] and refuse
to hear yourself speak. For that heedless flow will carry with it
many expressions which you would wish to criticize.
And, I repeat, you could not attain it and at the same time

preserve your sense of shame. Moreover, you would need to prac-
tice every day, and transfer your attention from subject matter to

words. But words, even if they came to you readily and flowed

182 THE TAO OF SENECA | VOLUME 1
without any exertion on your part, yet would have to be kept

under control. For just as a less ostentatious gait becomes a phi-
losopher, so does a restrained style of speech, far removed from

boldness. Therefore, the ultimate kernel of my remarks is this: I
bid you be slow of speech. Farewell
Footnotes
1. This person cannot be identified.
2. The explanation of Professor Summers seems sound, that the metaphor is
taken from a mountain-torrent. Compare the description of Cratinus’ style
in Aristophanes, Ach. 526, or that of Pindar in Horace, Od. iv. 2. 5 ff.
3. Iliad, iii. 222 (Odysseus), and i. 249 (Nestor).
4. Seneca’s phrase, quae fieri posse non crederes, has been interpreted as a
definition of παράδοξα. It is more probable, however, that he is comparing
with the juggler’s tricks the verbal performances of certain lecturers, whose
jargon one marvels at but does not care to hear again.
5. The Greek texts were still written without separation of the words, in
contrast with the Roman.
6. Gradarius may be contrasted with tolutarius, “trotter.” The word might also
mean one who walks with dignified step, as in a religious procession.
7. Cf. Martial, xi. 27. 7 aut cum perfricuit frontem posuitque pudorem. After a
violent rubbing, the face would not show blushes.

LETTER 41
On the God Within Us

A

You are doing an excellent thing, one which will be wholesome
for you, if, as you write me, you are persisting in your effort to
attain sound understanding; it is foolish to pray for this when you
can acquire it from yourself. We do not need to uplift our hands
towards heaven, or to beg the keeper of a temple to let us approach
his idol’s ear, as if in this way our prayers were more likely to be
heard. God is near you, he is with you, he is within you.
This is what I mean, Lucilius: a holy spirit indwells within us,
one who marks our good and bad deeds, and is our guardian. As
we treat this spirit, so are we treated by it. Indeed, no man can be
good without the help of God. Can one rise superior to fortune
unless God helps him to rise? He it is that gives noble and upright
counsel. In each good man
A god doth dwell, but what god know we not.[1]
If ever you have come upon a grove that is full of ancient trees
which have grown to an unusual height, shutting out a view of
the sky by a veil of pleached and intertwining branches, then the
loftiness of the forest, the seclusion of the spot, and your marvel
at the thick unbroken shade in the midst of the open spaces, will
prove to you the presence of deity. Or if a cave, made by the deep
crumbling of the rocks, holds up a mountain on its arch, a place

184 THE TAO OF SENECA | VOLUME 1
not built with hands but hollowed out into such spaciousness
by natural causes, your soul will be deeply moved by a certain
intimation of the existence of God. We worship the sources of
mighty rivers; we erect altars at places where great streams burst
suddenly from hidden sources; we adore springs of hot water as
divine, and consecrate certain pools because of their dark waters
or their immeasurable depth.
If you see a man who is unterrified in the midst of dangers,
untouched by desires, happy in adversity, peaceful amid the
storm, who looks down upon men from a higher plane, and views
the gods on a footing of equality, will not a feeling of reverence for
him steal over you, will you not say: “This quality is too great and
too lofty to be regarded as resembling this petty body in which it
dwells? A divine power has descended upon that man.”
When a soul rises superior to other souls, when it is under
control, when it passes through every experience as if it were of
small account, when it smiles at our fears and at our prayers, it
is stirred by a force from heaven. A thing like this cannot stand
upright unless it be propped by the divine. Therefore, a greater
part of it abides in that place from whence it came down to earth.
Just as the rays of the sun do indeed touch the earth, but still
abide at the source from which they are sent; even so the great
and hallowed soul, which has come down in order that we may
have a nearer knowledge of divinity, does indeed associate with
us, but still cleaves to its origin; on that source it depends, thither
it turns its gaze and strives to go, and it concerns itself with our
doings only as a being superior to ourselves.
What, then, is such a soul? One which is resplendent with no
external good, but only with its own. For what is more foolish
than to praise in a man the qualities which come from without?
And what is more insane than to marvel at characteristics which
may at the next instant be passed on to someone else? A golden
bit does not make a better horse. The lion with gilded mane, in
process of being trained and forced by weariness to endure the
decoration, is sent into the arena in quite a different way from
the wild lion whose spirit is unbroken; the latter, indeed, bold in
his attack, as nature wished him to be, impressive because of his
wild appearance—and it is his glory that none can look upon him
without fear—is favoured[2] in preference to the other lion, that
languid and gilded brute.
No man ought to glory except in that which is his own. We
praise a vine if it makes the shoots teem with increase, if by its
weight it bends to the ground the very poles which hold its fruit;
would any man prefer to this vine one from which golden grapes
and golden leaves hang down? In a vine the virtue peculiarly
its own is fertility; in man also we should praise that which is
his own. Suppose that he has a retinue of comely slaves and a
beautiful house, that his farm is large and large his income; none
of these things is in the man himself; they are all on the outside.
Praise the quality in him which cannot be given or snatched
away, that which is the peculiar property of the man. Do you ask
what this is? It is soul, and reason brought to perfection in the
soul. For man is a reasoning animal. Therefore, man’s highest
good is attained, if he has fulfilled the good for which nature
designed him at birth.
And what is it which this reason demands of him? The easiest
thing in the world—to live in accordance with his own nature. But
this is turned into a hard task by the general madness of mankind;
we push one another into vice. And how can a man be recalled
to salvation, when he has none to restrain him, and all mankind
to urge him on? Farewell.
Footnotes
1. Vergil, Aeneid, viii. 352, Hoc nemus, hune, inquit, frondoso vertice collem,
Quis deus incertum est, habitat deus, and cf. Quintillian, i. 10. 88, where
he is speaking of Ennius, whom “sicut sacros vetustate lucos adoremus, in

186 THE TAO OF SENECA | VOLUME 1
quibus grandia et antiqua robora iam non tantum habent speciem quantem
religionem.”
2. The spectators of the fight, which is to take place between the two lions,
applaud the wild lion and bet on him.

LETTER 42
On Values
A

[If interested, a free audiobook version of this letter
can be found at this web address: tim.blog/42]
Has that friend of yours already made you believe that he is a
good man? And yet it is impossible in so short a time for one
either to become good or be known as such.[1] Do you know what
kind of man I now mean when I speak of “a good man”? I mean
one of the second grade, like your friend. For one of the first class
perhaps springs into existence, like the phoenix, only once in
five hundred years. And it is not surprising, either, that greatness
develops only at long intervals; Fortune often brings into being
commonplace powers, which are born to please the mob; but she
holds up for our approval that which is extraordinary by the very
fact that she makes it rare.
This man, however, of whom you spoke, is still far from the
state which he professes to have reached. And if he knew what it
meant to be “a good man,” he would not yet believe himself such;
perhaps he would even despair of his ability to become good.
“But,” you say, “he thinks ill of evil men.” Well, so do evil men
themselves; and there is no worse penalty for vice than the fact
that it is dissatisfied with itself and all its fellows.

188 THE TAO OF SENECA | VOLUME 1
“But he hates those who make an ungoverned use of great
power suddenly acquired.” I retort that he will do the same thing
as soon as he acquires the same powers. In the case of many men,
their vices, being powerless, escape notice; although, as soon as
the persons in question have become satisfied with their own

strength, the vices will be no less daring than those which pros-
perity has already disclosed.

These men simply lack the means whereby they may unfold
their wickedness. Similarly, one can handle even a poisonous
snake while it is stiff with cold; the poison is not lacking; it is
merely numbed into inaction. In the case of many men, their
cruelty, ambition, and indulgence only lack the favour of Fortune
to make them dare crimes that would match the worst. That their
wishes are the same you will in a moment discover, in this way:
give them the power equal to their wishes.
Do you remember how, when you declared that a certain
person was under your influence, I pronounced him fickle and
a bird of passage, and said that you held him not by the foot but
merely by a wing? Was I mistaken? You grasped him only by a
feather; he left it in your hands and escaped. You know what an
exhibition he afterwards made of himself before you, how many
of the things he attempted were to recoil upon his own head.
He did not see that in endangering others he was tottering to
his own downfall. He did not reflect how burdensome were the
objects which he was bent upon attaining, even if they were not
superfluous.
Therefore, with regard to the objects which we pursue, and
for which we strive with great effort, we should note this truth;
either there is nothing desirable in them, or the undesirable is
preponderant. Some objects are superfluous; others are not worth
the price we pay for them. But we do not see this clearly, and we
regard things as free gifts when they really cost us very dear.
Our stupidity may be clearly proved by the fact that we hold
that “buying” refers only to the objects for which we pay cash,
and we regard as free gifts the things for which we spend our very
selves. These we should refuse to buy, if we were compelled to give
in payment for them our houses or some attractive and profitable
estate; but we are eager to attain them at the cost of anxiety, of
danger, and of lost honour, personal freedom, and time; so true
it is that each man regards nothing as cheaper than himself.
Let us therefore act, in all our plans and conduct, just as we
are accustomed to act whenever we approach a huckster who
has certain wares for sale; let us see how much we must pay for
that which we crave. Very often the things that cost nothing cost
us the most heavily; I can show you many objects the quest and
acquisition of which have wrested freedom from our hands. We
should belong to ourselves, if only these things did not belong
to us.
I would therefore have you reflect thus, not only when it is a
question of gain, but also when it is a question of loss. “This object
is bound to perish.” Yes, it was a mere extra; you will live without it
just as easily as you have lived before. If you have possessed it for a
long time, you lose it after you have had your fill of it; if you have
not possessed it long, then you lose it before you have become
wedded to it. “You will have less money.” Yes, and less trouble.
“Less influence.” Yes, and less envy. Look about you and note
the things that drive us mad, which we lose with a flood of tears;
you will perceive that it is not the loss that troubles us with
reference to these things, but a notion of loss. No one feels that
they have been lost, but his mind tells him that it has been so. He
that owns himself has lost nothing. But how few men are blessed
with ownership of self! Farewell.
Footnotes
1. Seneca doubtless has in mind the famous passage of Simonides, ἄνδρ ̓
ἀγαθὸν μὲν ἀληθῶς γενέσθαι χαλεπόν, discussed by Plato, Protagoras, 339 A.

LETTER 43
On the Relativity of Fame

A

Do you ask how the news reached me, and who informed me,

that you were entertaining this idea, of which you had said noth-
ing to a single soul? It was that most knowing of persons—gossip.

“What,” you say, “am I such a great personage that I can stir up
gossip?” Now there is no reason why you should measure yourself
according to this part of the world;[1] have regard only to the place
where you are dwelling.
Any point which rises above adjacent points is great, at the spot
where it rises. For greatness is not absolute; comparison increases
it or lessens it. A ship which looms large in the river seems tiny
when on the ocean. A rudder which is large for one vessel, is
small for another.
So you in your province[2] are really of importance, though
you scorn yourself. Men are asking what you do, how you dine,
and how you sleep, and they find out, too; hence there is all the
more reason for your living circumspectly. Do not, however, deem
yourself truly happy until you find that you can live before men’s
eyes, until your walls protect but do not hide you; although we
are apt to believe that these walls surround us, not to enable us
to live more safely, but that we may sin more secretly.
I shall mention a fact by which you may weigh the worth of a
man’s character: you will scarcely find anyone who can live with
his door wide open. It is our conscience, not our pride, that has
put doorkeepers at our doors; we live in such a fashion that being
suddenly disclosed to view is equivalent to being caught in the
act. What profits it, however, to hide ourselves away, and to avoid
the eyes and ears of men?
A good conscience welcomes the crowd, but a bad conscience,
even in solitude, is disturbed and troubled. If your deeds are
honourable, let everybody know them; if base, what matters it
that no one knows them, as long as you yourself know them?
How wretched you are if you despise such a witness! Farewell.
Footnotes
1. i.e., Rome.
2. Lucilius was at this time the imperial procurator in Sicily.

LETTER 44

On Philosophy and Pedigrees

A

You are again insisting to me that you are a nobody, and saying
that nature in the first place, and fortune in the second, have
treated you too scurvily, and this in spite of the fact that you have
it in your power to separate yourself from the crowd and rise to
the highest human happiness! If there is any good in philosophy,
it is this—that it never looks into pedigrees. All men, if traced
back to their original source, spring from the gods.
You are a Roman knight, and your persistent work promoted
you to this class; yet surely there are many to whom the fourteen
rows are barred;[1] the senate-chamber is not open to all; the army,
too, is scrupulous in choosing those whom it admits to toil and
danger. But a noble mind is free to all men; according to this test,
we may all gain distinction. Philosophy neither rejects nor selects
anyone; its light shines for all.
Socrates was no aristocrat. Cleanthes worked at a well and
served as a hired man watering a garden. Philosophy did not
find Plato already a nobleman; it made him one. Why then should
you despair of becoming able to rank with men like these? They
are all your ancestors, if you conduct yourself in a manner worthy
of them; and you will do so if you convince yourself at the outset
that no man outdoes you in real nobility.
We have all had the same number of forefathers; there is no
man whose first beginning does not transcend memory. Plato
says: “Every king springs from a race of slaves, and every slave
has had kings among his ancestors.”[2] The flight of time, with its
vicissitudes, has jumbled all such things together, and Fortune
has turned them upside down.
Then who is well-born? He who is by nature well fitted for
virtue. That is the one point to be considered; otherwise, if you
hark back to antiquity, every one traces back to a date before
which there is nothing. From the earliest beginnings of the
universe to the present time, we have been led forward out of
origins that were alternately illustrious and ignoble. A hall full of
smoke-begrimed busts does not make the nobleman. No past life
has been lived to lend us glory, and that which has existed before
us is not ours; the soul alone renders us noble, and it may rise
superior to Fortune out of any earlier condition, no matter what
that condition has been.[3]
Suppose, then, that you were not that Roman knight, but a
freedman, you might nevertheless by your own efforts come to be
the only free man amid a throng of gentlemen. “How?” you ask.
Simply by distinguishing between good and bad things without
patterning your opinion from the populace. You should look,
not to the source from which these things come, but to the goal
towards which they tend. If there is anything that can make life
happy, it is good on its own merits; for it cannot degenerate into
evil.
Where, then, lies the mistake, since all men crave the happy
life? It is that they regard the means for producing happiness
as happiness itself, and, while seeking happiness, they are really
fleeing from it. For although the sum and substance of the happy
life is unalloyed freedom from care, and though the secret of
such freedom is unshaken confidence, yet men gather together

194 THE TAO OF SENECA | VOLUME 1
that which causes worry, and, while travelling life’s treacherous
road, not only have burdens to bear, but even draw burdens
to themselves; hence they recede farther and farther from the
achievement of that which they seek, and the more effort they
expend, the more they hinder themselves and are set back. This
is what happens when you hurry through a maze; the faster you
go, the worse you are entangled. Farewell.
Footnotes
1. Alluding to seats reserved for the knights at the theatre.
2. Plato, Theaetetus, p. 174 E.
3. Compare with the whole argument Menander, Frag. 533 Kock, ending:
ὂς ἂν εὖ γεγονὼς ᾖ τῇ φύσει πρὸς τἀγαθά, κἂν Αἰθίοψ ᾖ, μῆτερ, ἐστὶν
εὐγενής.